WASHINGTON President Biden signed an executive order on Thursday designed to sharpen the federal government's powers to block Chinese investment in technology in the United States and limit its access to private data on citizens, in a move that is bound to heighten tensions with Beijing.
The new order is designed to focus the actions of the secretive Committee on Foreign Investments in the United States, created by Congress nearly a half-century ago. For years the committee's powers were limited largely to blocking the foreign acquisition of American firms that might have a direct impact on national security a military contractor, for example.
But the most far-reaching part of Mr. Biden's new order, and potentially the most important element in coming months, directs the committee to consider whether a pending deal involves the purchase of a business with access to Americans' sensitive data, and whether a foreign company or government could exploit that information.
That wording reflects growing unease about China's ability to access the personal information that Americans hand over to mobile apps and other services. The committee, known by the acronym CFIUS, is believed to be already scrutinizing TikTok, the popular Chinese-owned video app that critics worry could expose its users' data to the Chinese government.
So far the Biden administration has said little about its review of TikTok. In the last months of the Trump administration, there was a hasty effort to force a sale of the American operations of TikTok to a consortium of American and other Western companies; it quickly fell apart. And the deal never resolved the broader question in the expanding technology wars between Washington and Beijing: How should the United States deal with the foreign apps that are becoming embedded on the screens of Americans' smartphones, and thus in the daily fabric of American digital life?
In recent months, evidence has emerged that TikTok employees in China had the ability to access data about Americans who signed up for the service. There is no public evidence the company has handed data over to the Chinese government, but Chinese national security laws could require the company to do so. The issue now is whether requiring the transfer of all that data to American-based servers would solve that problem, or merely mitigate it. And there are continuing questions about who designs the algorithms that track the interests and activities of Americans online.
Chinese intelligence agencies have gone to great lengths to obtain vast troves of data about Americans, including by hacking the databases of the Office of Personnel Management during the Obama administration. Before American authorities caught on, the information that 22.5 million Americans had filed for security clearances was in Chinese hands. It has never been clear what China did with that data.
The executive order, which has been anticipated for months, does not regulate "outbound investment" by American companies in foreign nations, though the Biden administration seems likely to seek new authority to regulate that as well. For years, one concern has been China's requirement that foreign companies turn over technology as part of the price for being allowed to enter the Chinese market.
"For China, this work is about survival," Nigel Inkster, the former director of operations and intelligence for Britain's Secret Intelligence Service, wrote in The New York Times opinion section earlier this week, delineating covert operations by Chinese operatives to gain technology or manufacturing techniques that would speed Beijing's way. He noted a law in China that orders Chinese citizens to help intelligence agencies, usually secretly.
The new order directs CFIUS to concentrate on specific types of transactions that would give a foreign power access to technologies that Mr. Biden has identified as critical to American economic growth. That includes "microelectronics, artificial intelligence, biotechnology and biomanufacturing, quantum computing, advanced clean energy and climate adaptation technologies," according to a White House summary.
While China is not specifically mentioned in the order, all of those are areas are part of the "Made in China 2025" drive started seven years ago by President Xi Jinping, and they are also technologies in which the United States is now investing more federal resources.
To some degree the presidential order formalizes a new, broader interpretation of the committee's authority that has been underway for several years. White House officials say that they believe Mr. Biden's order to focus CFIUS on certain technologies does not require amending its authorizing laws, which date back to the group's creation during the Gerald Ford administration.
For most of its history, CIFIUS only examined transactions in which a foreign firm sought to purchase a controlling interest in an American company that dealt in sensitive technologies. It blocked several such sales, often because it concluded that the firms provided weapons systems or products used by the intelligence agencies. (The Department of Defense and intelligence officials are members of the committee.) In other cases, American firms were required to divest themselves of a sensitive product or technology before the transaction could go through.
But over time it became obvious that a foreign firm did not need a majority share in a company in order to access key technologies. So over the past seven or so years, the power of the interagency group has expanded significantly, and it now has the power to block even a minority investment. That was driven, in part, out of fears that Chinese state-owned firms were setting up venture capital funds in Silicon Valley and beyond to get an early look at new technologies.
A White House statement said the new order would enshrine that approach, and look not at the size of the investment but at the characteristics of the technology itself, including "advancements and applications in technology that could undermine national security."
The CFIUS members would not have to establish that a technology was currently vital to national security as long as it had that potential. For example, artificial intelligence software or quantum computers that would create strong encryption of data, or break that encryption, could trigger government action to keep the technology from the hands of Chinese or other competitors.
The order also authorizes the committee to block any deal that "erodes United States cybersecurity." And it urges review of "incremental investments over time in a sector or technology" that could "cede, part-by-part, domestic development or control in that sector or technology."
President Vladimir V. Putin acknowledged on Thursday that China had "questions and concerns" about Russia's war in Ukraine, a notable, if cryptic, admission that Moscow lacks the full backing of its biggest, most powerful partner on the world stage.
Mr. Putin met China's leader, Xi Jinping, on Thursday in their first in-person meeting since Russia invaded Ukraine, and as Mr. Xi traveled abroad for the first time since the start of the pandemic. But rather than put on a show of Eurasian unity against the West as Russia struggled to recover from last week's humiliating military retreat in northeastern Ukraine, the two leaders struck discordant notes in their public remarks and Mr. Xi made no mention of Ukraine at all.
"We highly appreciate the balanced position of our Chinese friends in connection with the Ukrainian crisis," Mr. Putin said in televised remarks at the start of the meeting. "We understand your questions and concerns in this regard."
It was a moment, on the sidelines of a regional summit in Uzbekistan, that showed the daunting political straits Mr. Putin finds himself in nearly seven months into his invasion of Ukraine. On the battlefield, Russia has lost more than 1,000 square miles of territory this month, rendering the prospect of a decisive victory over a Western-armed Ukraine as remote as ever. At home, Mr. Putin is facing unusual criticism from some supporters over his slow military progress.
And internationally, as the West continues to ratchet up sanctions against the Kremlin, the Russian president on Thursday saw Mr. Xi who had pledged a friendship with "no limits" just three weeks before Russia invaded conspicuously withhold any public support for Mr. Putin's war.
Instead, in a statement issued after their meeting, China said it was "willing to work with Russia to demonstrate the responsibility of a major country, play a leading role, and inject stability into a turbulent world." To scholars who study the between-the-lines messaging of the Chinese government's public remarks, it sounded like an implicit rebuke.
Sergey Radchenko, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, said the statement appeared to telegraph "a reproach to the Russians, that they're not acting like a great power, that they are creating instability." Shi Yinhong, a longtime professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing, said it was "the most prudent or most low-key statement in years on Xi's part on the strategic relationship between the two countries."
Accentuating the dissonance, even as Mr. Xi said nothing on camera about Ukraine, Mr. Putin at Thursday's meeting backed Beijing in its confrontation over Taiwan, where tensions rose last month amid a visit by U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to lend support for Taiwan's resistance to pressure from Beijing, which claims the self-ruled island democracy.
Still, China continues to represent a critical lifeline for Russia as Moscow looks for new export and import markets amid the crush of Western sanctions over the war. China has increased its purchases of Russian energy, while selling Russia more cars and some other goods. That support is "very important for Russia," said Alexander Gabuev, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, adding that he believed the Kremlin was "cleareyed" about the limits of China's backing.
After their one-on-one talks on Thursday, Mr. Xi and Mr. Putin also held a joint meeting with President Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh of Mongolia, whose country is in talks about hosting a new natural gas pipeline that would allow Russia to sell more of its Siberian gas to China, rather than to Europe.
A Russian deputy prime minister, Aleksandr Novak, said Russia was close to reaching a deal to sell 50 billion cubic meters of gas per year to China through the planned pipeline about the same volume as the capacity of the idle Nord Stream 2 pipeline linking Russia with Germany. Such a pipeline would, however, require years to complete.
"We see completely eye to eye on the international situation," Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, said of the talks between Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi, describing the meeting as "wonderful." He pledged that Russian and Chinese officials would coordinate closely at the United Nations General Assembly in New York next week.
But although Chinese state media have echoed Russian propaganda in recent months, there is much that China has not done to support Russia in the war and its conflict with the West confrontations that Mr. Putin describes as existential for his country. China appears to have refrained so far this year from shipping weapons to Russia, forcing Moscow to ask Iran and North Korea for military equipment, according to U.S. officials. And it has done little to help Russia circumvent Western sanctions that prevent it from importing advanced Western technology.
"Access to Western technology, Western markets, Western money is of paramount importance" for China, Mr. Gabuev said, explaining why Mr. Xi was not prepared to support Russia in ways that could lead to Western sanctions against Beijing.
U.S. officials say that Russia and China see each other as useful in challenging the West, but also that Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi will only go so far to support the other. Russia is seeking material aid from China for its war efforts, Ned Price, the State Department spokesman, said on Thursday at a news conference. But American officials said this week that they have not seen China give any such aid yet.
"What's striking is Putin's admission that President Xi has concerns about Russia's war against Ukraine," Mr. Price said. "It's not surprising the P.R.C. has such concerns. It is somewhat curious that President Putin would be the one to admit it."
Mr. Radchenko, the professor, said Mr. Putin "has severely undercut his leverage with China" by cutting himself off from the West. The Chinese government, he said, appeared to see the war as a harmful development, in part because the resulting turmoil in global food and energy markets "created a kind of environment that is not conducive to China's economic growth."
"Putin is extremely reckless," Mr. Radchenko said. "And he's willing to take risks that China would not approve of."
Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi met on the sidelines of a summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a security-focused organization that includes China, Russia, India, Pakistan and four Central Asian nations. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey also attended and was expected to meet Mr. Putin on Friday. Russian state television reminded viewers that the gathered leaders represented more than half the world's population, a message aimed at rebutting the idea that invading Ukraine had left Mr. Putin isolated.
But for Mr. Xi, analysts said, the summit was as much about building ties with other countries in the region as it was about seeing Mr. Putin. China's state broadcaster showed videos depicting Mr. Xi as being feted with enormous pomp and fanfare upon his arrival in Kazakhstan, where he stopped on Wednesday before being greeted by an honor guard, dancers and musicians in Uzbekistan.
For China, "this is not fundamentally about China-Russia they've spent a lot of time cultivating their neighbors across the border," said Evan A. Feigenbaum, an Asia specialist at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Mr. Feigenbaum said that while Beijing wants to show diplomatic support for Russia, to counter the U.S. dominance, it will also avoid any moves that might draw sanctions that would further hurt China's slowing economy. At the same time, he said, China is seeking to offer rhetorical reassurances to former Soviet republics in Central Asia that have been made uneasy by the Ukraine war an invasion that signaled to some that Mr. Putin is prepared to use force to try to rebuild the Soviet empire.
Mr. Shi, the professor in Beijing, said Mr. Xi and Mr. Putin have almost certainly been in regular communication for months and know each other well, so it was less important for them to talk than for Mr. Xi to speak with Central Asian leaders.
"Talking with Putin after so many online conversations in the past 200 days is far from so important or necessary," he said, "while Russia's failure in the present campaign in the field make China's prudence and military noninvolvement more imperative."
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia met Xi Jinping of China on Wednesday, displaying a united front against what the two autocratic leaders consider to be American hegemony.
However, Mr. Putin was also looking to China as a lifeline at a time of weakness. Russian forces have suffered significant losses on the battlefield in Ukraine, and as Western sanctions continue to inflict damage on the Russian economy, Beijing has emerged as a major buyer of Russian products.
Mr. Putin was likely looking for something more substantial than a statement of ongoing support, analysts said. He also hoped to close a deal on a critical pipeline that could allow Moscow to export more Siberian natural gas to China rather than Europe, at a time when Europe is seeking to rapidly reduce energy imports from Russia because of Moscow's war in Ukraine.
Temur Umarov, a fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace who researches Russia, China and Central Asia, said that while China would seek to show support for its neighbor, the meeting was not as crucial for Beijing as it was for Moscow.
"I think for Xi Jinping it is not an important meeting," Mr. Umarov said prior to the meeting. "By contrast, for Vladimir Putin this is the most important thing he's doing in Uzbekistan."
Beijing was expected to remain cautious in its support for Russia, especially over the issue of Ukraine, analysts said. Providing additional help to Russia, either economically or militarily, risks running afoul of Western sanctions and imperiling China's economy.
"I don't think Xi Jinping is ready to show much support for Vladimir Putin," Mr. Umarov said. "But for Russia it is very important to show it has friends, it's not isolated and that it is still welcome in some parts of the world."
For Mr. Xi, the meeting was a chance to resume his role as a global statesman. It was his first trip abroad since he went to Myanmar in January 2020. He traveled to Hong Kong for the 25th anniversary of return to Chinese control on July 1, his first trip outside mainland China since the start of the pandemic.
The meeting also served China's broader goals. Beijing hoped to show it is not isolated despite tensions with the West over Taiwan, human rights and other issues, and aimed to push Beijing's vision of an alternative world order.
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said on Thursday that Moscow understood that China had "questions and concerns" about the war in Ukraine a notable, if cryptic, admission from Mr. Putin that Beijing may not fully approve of Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
He made the remark as he met with Xi Jinping, China's top leader, in Uzbekistan. China has staked out a neutral position on the invasion publicly, even as it has echoed the Kremlin's rhetoric about Russia's being treated unfairly by the West and as China's propaganda apparatus has parroted Russian disinformation about Western bioweapons.
The summit, meant to signal the strength of the relationship between the two authoritarian leaders at a time of increasing animosity with the West and challenges to their agendas, is particularly important to Mr. Putin, who has become more isolated by the United States and its allies over his invasion of Ukraine. Russia has also faced a spate of recent losses on the battlefield.
"We highly appreciate the balanced position of our Chinese friends in connection with the Ukrainian crisis," Mr. Putin said in televised remarks at the start of the meeting. "We understand your questions and concerns in this regard. During today's meeting, of course, we will explain in detail our position on this issue, although we have spoken about this before."
Mr. Xi carefully steered clear of offering any endorsement of specific Russian policies, offering generalities instead about China's and Russia's view of the world.
After the meeting, China released a statement saying that "China is ready to work with Russia in extending strong support to each other on issues concerning their respective core interests."
The transcript did not have any comment from Mr. Xi regarding Ukraine or the threat posed by NATO. Mr. Putin, by contrast, railed against the "unipolar," American-led world order that he sees Beijing and Moscow aligned against.
"We jointly stand for the formation of a just, democratic and multipolar world order based on international law and the central role of the U.N., and not on some rules that someone has come up with and is trying to impose on others, without even explaining what it's about," Mr. Putin told Mr. Xi.
One of the core principles of Chinese foreign policy, repeated again in official statements from Mr. Xi's meetings this week with Central Asian heads of state, is that countries should not intervene in others' internal affairs and should respect one another's borders.
Mr. Xi, who is under pressure as China's zero-Covid policy hurts the economy, needs to project power in the weeks before a meeting of the country's Communist Party leadership.
The two held talks on the sidelines of a summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a multilateral, security-focused organization that includes China, Russia, India, Pakistan and four Central Asian nations.
Chinese support is important to Russia. China bought record levels of Russian oil in May, June and July. But Beijing has been careful to avoid violating sanctions on Russia that could lead to it being punished as well.
Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi last met in February, before the start of the Winter Olympics in Beijing. In a 5,300-word statement, they declared a friendship with "no limits" and criticized the influence of the United States in their regions.
For Mr. Xi, the meeting is also a chance to resume his role as a global statesman.
BRUSSELS The European Union said on Wednesday that it aimed to ban all goods that were the product of forced labor, a move that analysts predicted could hit exports from Xinjiang, the Chinese region where Beijing is believed to be forcing ethnic Uyghurs to work in camps.
The European proposal followed a U.S. policy that became law in December that explicitly singled out goods from Xinjiang. The E.U. plan did not mention Xinjiang, but China is widely seen as a target of the bill following increasing pressure within the bloc to address human rights violations by Beijing.
The U.S. law imposes a blanket ban on products from Xinjiang. By contrast, the European bill would apply to all goods circulating inside the bloc deemed to have been created with forced labor, without specifying particular countries or sectors, which analysts say reflects wariness over antagonizing Beijing and breaching World Trade Organization rules on trade.
Li Yong, an analyst with the China Association of International Trade, a government-funded research group in Beijing, told The Global Times, a Communist Party-owned daily, that the European proposal reflected "the deep-rooted racial discrimination and prejudice of the West."
Valdis Dombrovskis, the E.U. trade chief, told reporters that the European Commission, the bloc's executive body, which drafted the proposal, was "very careful to make sure that what we are doing is compatible with the W.T.O. rules and obligations in our bilateral deals."
"The key word for this was nondiscrimination," he added.
The European rules, which are expected to become law next year and take another two years to be fully implemented, come at a critical time for victims of forced labor. Compounding crises, including the Covid-19 pandemic, climate change and armed conflicts have led to a record increase in modern slavery, according to the United Nations.
Not counting commercial sexual exploitation, about 17 million people are currently victims of forced labor in the private sector, according to a U.N. report published this week, and some 3.9 million are forced to work by governments. Manufacturing, construction and agriculture are the sectors most affected.
European consumers, often unknowingly or indirectly, profit from such abuse. According to estimates by advocacy groups, one-fifth of cotton products in the global clothing industry are "tainted by forced labor" from Xinjiang, and almost half the worldwide supply of polysilicon, a key component of solar panels, comes from the region.
The European proposal would make the national authorities of the bloc's 27 members responsible for enforcing the ban. But critics say that failing to identify the regions or industries that are the biggest culprits, as well as leaving individual nations to determine how to implement the policy, stood out as major weaknesses.
In the United States, the authorities are empowered to seize goods suspected of being the products of forced labor coming from Xinjiang. But in Europe, the authorities have to prove that the goods are in breach of the rules, and only then can they withdraw them from the market. The administrative and legal burden on the European authorities, which have varying capacities and political commitment to this cause, will most likely weaken the implementation, analysts said.
"A lot will depend on the political will of national governments," said Niclas Poitiers, a trade researcher at Bruegel, a Brussels-based research institute. "I wouldn't be surprised if we see a very different application in Germany than in Hungary," he added. (Hungary's prime minister, Viktor Orban, has built a close relationship with Beijing, facilitating sprawling Chinese investment in his country.)
The proposed law follows significant pressure from civil society and European lawmakers to confront China about its human rights record. Last year, the European Parliament blocked a landmark commercial agreement between the bloc and China, citing rights violations and a "totalitarian threat" from Beijing. And in June, after the publication of the "Xinjiang Police Files," which detailed years of repression against the Uyghurs, lawmakers adopted a resolution calling for an outright import ban.
The proposed law has been criticized for failing to mention China but also because it does not help victims of forced labor to claim back wages, retrieve their documents or seek compensation.
"Does it help the fate of the Uyghurs? I am afraid it falls short," Reinhard Buetikofer, a German member of the European Parliament for the Greens, told reporters on Monday. "I am not happy that state-induced forced labor is not even mentioned in the text," he added.
Europe's relations with China, which is considered simultaneously a partner and a "systemic rival," is in an awkward phase, given the Chinese government's support of Russia even after the invasion of Ukraine.
And to many, Europe's swift response to the Russian aggression highlighted the weakness of its policy toward China.
Referring to Xinjiang, Dilnur Reyhan, president of the European Uyghur Institute, said, "This genocide has been happening for five years and Europe has not yet done anything, just bread crumbs in terms of sanctions."
She added: "But we've seen what has happened since the Russian war in Ukraine. We know that Europe can respond very quickly if it wants to."
BEIJING The summit this week between President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and Xi Jinping of China is a show of force by two autocratic leaders united against what they consider American hegemony. It is also a moment of mutual weakness as Russia suffers losses in Ukraine and China endures an economic slowdown.
They come to the meeting, expected to take place later this week in Uzbekistan, with their own agendas and their own challenges that will test an important relationship both have described as a friendship with "no limits."
Moscow needs Beijing. Russia's recent routs on the battlefields of Ukraine, coupled with the broad damage inflicted by Western sanctions, have made Chinese support all the more important. China has emerged as a major buyer of Russian commodities, purchases that have helped replenish Moscow's coffers.
Beijing, though, remains cautious. It wants to project strength in the increasingly acrimonious competition with the United States and can't afford for its main partner in an authoritarian alliance to face a humiliating defeat. But providing substantial, additional help to Russia, either economically or militarily, risks running afoul of Western sanctions and imperiling China's economy.
"Xi's China has been carrying out an exquisite tightrope walk with regard to Russia," said Rana Mitter, a professor of history and politics at Oxford University. "It is keen to show support for Russia in general, but finds active support for an invasion too politically embarrassing to contemplate and wants Moscow to resolve matters one way or another."
Image matters for Mr. Xi as he prepares to secure a third term at a pivotal Communist Party congress in Beijing next month. His trip this week, during which he will attend a regional summit in Uzbekistan and visit Kazakhstan, marks the first time Mr. Xi has traveled abroad since the start of the pandemic and signals just how much he values the relationship. The meeting with Mr. Putin will give the Chinese leader a chance to look like a global statesman, playing well to a home audience.
Russia also provides much-needed backing for China's agenda. When House Speaker Nancy Pelosi visited Taiwan last month in defiance of China's claims to the self-ruled democracy, the Kremlin was quick to support Beijing's stance, describing the trip as "provocative" and pledging "absolute solidarity with China."
But China has tied itself to a war that has so far backfired for Russia. Any serious weakening of Mr. Putin's dominance in Russia could hurt Beijing's position at a time when the leadership is dealing with the political and economic fallout from its strict Covid policies.
The question confronting China is whether to double down or let Russia navigate the setbacks on its own. Both strategies carry risks, and most experts expect China to choose a middle path of continued economic support without openly circumventing sanctions or providing outright military assistance.
China, which has avoided describing Russia's invasion of Ukraine as a war, appears to be tempering its bets. When Mr. Xi's second-highest-ranking deputy, Li Zhanshu, met with Mr. Putin in Russia last week, Chinese state media emphasized the two countries' shared admiration but steered clear of overt advocacy for Russia's actions in Ukraine.
China's official Xinhua news agency said Mr. Li has told Mr. Putin that, "political mutual trust, strategic coordination and pragmatic cooperation between the two countries have reached an unprecedented level."
Xinhua made no mention of Ukraine, even as Russia state media claimed Beijing backed the invasion, portraying Mr. Li as having said that China "understands and supports Russia" particularly "on the situation in Ukraine."
"China keeps avoiding military involvement in any degree in Russia's war and will continue to do so, especially when the Russians have been in a drastic failure situation in the field," said Shi Yinhong, a professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing. "China's diplomatic and political support or sympathy will not really help them, though dramatic purchases of their energy since April help a little non-militarily."
Mr. Putin, who describes his war as part of a battle against nefarious Western powers that threaten Russia's very existence, appears to find China's middle ground vexing. He suggested as much last week in describing the long-running negotiations for a new pipeline that could allow Russia to export more Siberian natural gas to China rather than Europe a matter of critical importance to Moscow as Europe rushes to reduce energy imports from Russia.
"Our Chinese friends are tough bargainers," Mr. Putin said at a conference in the Russian port city of Vladivostok focused on increasing economic ties with Asia. "Naturally, they proceed from their national interests in any deal, which is the only way to go."
Mr. Putin will go into the meeting with Mr. Xi looking to China as a lifeline at perhaps Russia's most tenuous moment since the invasion began in February. Russian forces have recently lost more than one thousand square miles of territory in Ukraine, creating new political headwinds for Mr. Putin even from some of his longtime supporters, now frustrated by Russia's bumbling war effort.
At this week's meeting, Mr. Putin hopes to close a deal for the natural gas pipeline. Russia also needs access to China's high-tech exports and Chinese currency to pay for those goods, since Russia's access to dollars is severely restricted.
"China has more leverage than Russia," said Alexander Gabuev, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
As Western countries shun Moscow, it is the expanding ties with China that Mr. Putin points to most as proof that Russia cannot be isolated. It is a relationship to which Mr. Putin has devoted enormous effort, one that accelerated after relations with the West took a dive following Russia's annexation of the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea in 2014.
The honor of meeting Mr. Xi in person is sure to be extolled by Russia's state media as evidence of Mr. Putin's continued acumen on the world stage. "Our relations have reached unprecedented heights," Mr. Putin said at the Vladivostok conference.
The century-old relationship between the two nations is steeped in ideology and history. Moscow was crucial to the Chinese Communist Party's founding, early survival and eventual victory in 1949 in China's Civil War. Relatively close relations have continued, although they were interrupted by a rift in the 1960s so serious that the two countries fought border skirmishes.
Mr. Xi himself has a longstanding connection to Russia and Mr. Putin, whom he has met with 38 times. The Chinese leader's father, Xi Zhongxun, a leading party figure in the 1950s, oversaw Soviet experts who came to China to help build the country's heavy industry after the civil war, said Joseph Torigian, the author of an upcoming biography on the elder Mr. Xi.
Mr. Xi's father visited Moscow, full of admiration. "He brought back mementos from Russia," Mr. Torigian said, "that Xi Jinping later recalled."
A week after he became China's president in March 2013, Mr. Xi chose Russia for his first trip abroad and hinted in a speech there that the two countries would work together against the West.
"Currently, China and Russia are both in important periods of national revival, and bilateral relations have entered a new stage," Mr. Xi said.
China now has the upper hand in the relationship, given its economic and military might. China's economy was 10 times the size of Russia's last year, before the war in Ukraine. From May through July, China bought record amounts of Russian oil at a deep discount and imported more Russian natural gas and coal.
Gazprom, the Russian gas giant, announced last week that China's payments for gas from one pipeline would no longer be made in dollars or euros, but in Russian rubles and Chinese renminbi. Such deals make it easier for Russia to bypass Western banks and buy Chinese goods that are similar to high-tech Western products under export restrictions.
While China has sold many cars and other products that do not use Western technology to Russia, it appears to have avoided the riskier activity of reselling advanced Western technology. China appears to have refrained so far this year from shipping weapons to Russia, forcing Moscow to ask Iran and North Korea for military equipment.
China's military has a long history of training with its Russian counterparts. Last week, China sent more than 2,000 People's Liberation Army soldiers, 21 combat aircraft and three warships to participate in joint military exercises in eastern Russia.
It was the first time that China had sent air, land and naval forces to participate in the major military exercise, which Mr. Putin personally oversaw.
But Mr. Xi is unlikely to tie his country more closely to Russia than he did in February, when he declared the limitless friendship.
"I don't really expect any sort of new statement to be made by Xi Jinping that would be perceived as more strategic support for Russia," said Li Mingjiang, a specialist in China's international relations at the National University of Singapore, "nor would I expect China to walk back from what has been said."
During a trip to China more than a decade ago as vice president, Joe Biden gave a speech celebrating the United States as the wealthiest country ever. The United States, he said, was two and a half times as rich as his host nation.
That afternoon, when Mr. Biden met his counterpart, Xi Jinping, for an informal stroll, security dominated the discussion. Mr. Xi complained that Washington was sending surveillance planes to spy on China, and Mr. Biden replied that the flights would continue, he would later tell American journalists.
Back then, such differences looked relatively manageable, not least because of regular meetings between the two nations' officials. Now, that wealth gap has narrowed, the security challenges are more perilous and the communication is minimal.
As their country's leaders, Mr. Biden and Mr. Xi are increasingly on a collision course that risks bringing about a new version of the Cold War, diplomats and analysts say. Military, economic and ideological tensions reverberate unchecked between the two powers. American allies in the Asia Pacific region fear being squeezed by Beijing, as China builds out its nuclear arsenal and competes for semiconductors.
And China, seeking to create an alliance of autocracies, is increasingly finding common purpose with Russia, with Mr. Xi and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir V. Putin, set to meet in person later this week. Despite Russia's setbacks in its war with Ukraine over the past week, Beijing isn't likely to shy away from the relationship. It needs a strong partner in Moscow to push back against what it sees as American hegemony.
Meanwhile, Beijing and Washington are moving farther apart. After Speaker Nancy Pelosi visited Taiwan in a show of support for the self-ruled democracy that China claims as its own, Beijing canceled three rounds of military talks and postponed five others on climate and international crime. The military discussions, while sporadic and often formulaic, were still considered important in an increasingly risky environment, with American and Chinese ships often navigating perilously close to each other in the waters off China.
"Around us, a storm is gathering," Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong of Singapore said in a speech last month. "U.S.-China relations are worsening, with intractable issues, deep suspicions and limited engagement between them. This is unlikely to improve anytime soon."
Mr. Lee said he was concerned that "miscalculations and mistakes" could easily make things worse.
Not that long ago, the climate was at least modestly better.
After Mr. Xi became China's top leader, he was quickly welcomed by President Barack Obama at a California estate. The Chinese leader visited four American cities in 2015, and Mr. Obama went to China. Their deputies convened regularly in each other's capitals, and large delegations of top officials held annual forums.
There were even suggestions that too much talk was producing too little action. At the annual Strategic and Economic Dialogue in Beijing in 2015, Secretary of State John Kerry spent an afternoon checking out an exhibit on African wildlife trafficking. That was during a period when China was building artificial islands in the South China Sea, about which there was little discussion.
Mr. Biden and Mr. Xi have spoken only five times by phone since early 2021. That scarcity of contact makes the frictions more dangerous, diplomats and analysts say.
"The absence of a sustained private dialogue favors mounting tension," said Charles Kupchan, a member of the National Security Council in the Obama administration and a professor of international relations at Georgetown University. "Disagreements fester and mistrust builds."
In a recent call, the two leaders agreed to fix a date for a face-to-face meeting, which seems likely to happen in November at a gathering of G20 leaders in Indonesia. Both are confirmed participants, along with Mr. Putin.
If it happens, it will be their first in-person talks since Mr. Biden entered the White House. Mr. Xi met with Mr. Putin earlier this year in Beijing and is expected to sit down with him again this week in Uzbekistan, part of a broader trip that would be the Chinese leader's first visit to a foreign country since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Beijing and Washington try to play down the metaphor of a new Cold War. But as each side moves to gain the upper hand, their actions often give the opposite impression.
In an article in Foreign Affairs this month, a Cornell University professor, Jessica Chen Weiss, wrote that both sides were "already engaged in a global struggle."
Given the deep distrust, new discussions are needed, albeit not necessarily the full array of contact seen under the Obama administration, Professor Weiss said in an email. "Given intense distrust on both sides, such discussions should not aim at creating a new framework or slogan that each side will see as a Trojan horse," she said.
The power balance was different during the Cold War. The Soviet Union was never an economic competitor with the United States, and Washington was able to exploit its quarrel with China.
President Richard Nixon persuaded Mao Zedong to forsake his old Soviet ally and come to America's side. Mr. Nixon and Henry Kissinger, his national security adviser, leveraged the new alignment to convince the Soviets to enter into arms control talks that continued into subsequent administrations.
Those talks were interwoven into summit meetings that allowed the leaders to meet with a substantive agenda in hand, and offer reassurances.
"Today our arms control agenda has vanished, in fact has moved in reverse," said Jon Huntsman, who has been the U.S. ambassador to both China and Russia.
Communications with the Soviet Union never reached the low point they are at now with China, Mr. Huntsman said. "The Chinese simply won't engage," he said. "Lights out. Nada."
The United States is worried about what appears to be China's rapid expansion of its nuclear arsenal. In July of last year, nuclear experts at the Federation of American Scientists said there was clear evidence that China was building more than 100 silos in its western desert for launching nuclear missiles.
In a November phone call, Mr. Biden suggested to Mr. Xi that they begin talks on "strategic stability." That phrase can cover nuclear strategy and crisis management, said Lyle Goldstein, director of Asia engagement at Defense Priorities, a research group in Washington.
Asked about Mr. Biden's offer at a news conference in mid-August, China's ambassador to the United States, Qin Gang, said that such talks were not possible until the United States resolved the "political foundation of our bilateral relations," meaning the future of Taiwan.
The loss of military discussions between the United States and China is perhaps the most worrisome development.
Those meetings were often stilted, with the Chinese officers reading from prepared scripts, Mr. Goldstein said. But sometimes the talks were helpful, nudging the two sides toward better understanding, if not specific solutions.
"I found our discussions to be respectful and collegial," said a former commander of the Pacific Fleet, Adm. Scott H. Swift, who met with his Chinese counterparts in 2016 and 2017, when relations were warmer. "As a result, we were able to move beyond our rhetorical challenges and focus on reducing the likelihood of unintended incidents at sea escalating to challenges our respective leadership would view as counterproductive."
Admiral Swift said he stressed the guidelines known as the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea, which set out protocol that Chinese and American vessels could follow when navigating close to each other.
In the current atmosphere, what interactions remain between the two countries are strained, at best.
In a classic piece of Cold War theater last month, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Beijing summoned the American ambassador, R. Nicholas Burns, to appear at its offices at the very moment that Ms. Pelosi landed in Taiwan.
Mr. Burns waited to make sure she had landed. Then he drove to the ministry, arriving a few minutes late.
"We had a difficult and contentious meeting," Mr. Burns said. "I defended Speaker Pelosi's right to visit Taiwan and said Beijing was overreacting and manufacturing a needless crisis."
SRINAGAR, Kashmir Their soldiers have fought with fists, rocks and wooden clubs along a disputed frontier high in the Himalayas. Both India and China have said they don't want a war, but the brawls led them to move thousands of soldiers to inhospitable terrain.
Now, the two nuclear-armed neighbors appear to be moving toward de-escalation after a conflict that endangered regional stability, with officials from both sides agreeing to pull back soldiers from friction points along their disputed border in the Ladakh region.
"The Indian and Chinese troops in the area of Gogra-Hot Springs have begun to disengage in a coordinated and planned way, which is conducive to the peace and tranquility in the border areas," India's Defense Ministry said on Thursday in a statement that the Chinese government also issued in almost identical form.
The border tensions escalated after India unilaterally stripped its part of the disputed Kashmir region of its semiautonomous status in August 2019. China, which also controls a portion of Kashmir, started a troop buildup along its side of the border with Ladakh, which had been part of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir before New Delhi split the region. (Pakistan also controls part of Kashmir.)
Beijing called India's decision to cement its control over Kashmir "illegal and invalid." India responded by saying it was an internal matter.
Months later, in June 2020, Indian and Chinese soldiers squared off after China's military moved tens of thousands of troops and artillery to disputed areas, including the strategic Galwan Valley. Fighting between the two sides left 20 Indian soldiers and an unknown number of Chinese troops dead in the worst border clash between the two nations since 1967.
Not a single shot was fired, following a longstanding code against using firearms, but the soldiers went at each other with fists, some possibly studded with nails or wrapped in barbed wire.
Since a major war in 1962, China and India have largely contained disputes through talks and treaties. Over the decades, there have been flare-ups along the 2,100-mile frontier between the two countries, which is referred to as the Line of Actual Control and is not well defined. But they did not result in a major escalation.
After that changed dramatically two years ago, the two sides looked to ease tensions, holding 16 rounds of commander-level talks, the last one in July.
After the announcement of the pullback in Gogra-Hot Springs, India's Ministry of External Affairs said in a statement on Friday that "the two sides have agreed to cease forward deployments in this area in a phased, coordinated and verified manner, resulting in the return of the troops of both sides to their respective areas."
Mao Ning, a spokeswoman for China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said at a regular briefing on Friday afternoon: "China firmly safeguards its sovereignty and territorial integrity. This position has not changed in any way. It is very firm."
She added: "China is committed to resolving differences through dialogue and consultation. This is why we have been in communication with India on border issues through diplomatic and military channels."
Deependra Singh Hooda, a retired lieutenant general who led India's Northern Command, which covers Kashmir and part of the Chinese border, warned that the announcement had not completely ended the conflict.
He said that there were places where Chinese soldiers remained in place, and that if Indian soldiers were stopped from patrolling their own areas, that implied those areas were under the control of China.
Still, "this is a positive development," Mr. Hooda said, adding that while the full nature of the agreement was unclear, "at least troops have gotten separated."
The announcement came a week before the leaders of India and China will attend the Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit meeting in Samarkand, Uzbekistan.
It will be the first time that Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India and Xi Jinping, China's leader, will be under one roof since the deadly clash.
Both Mr. Xi and Mr. Modi increasingly risked allowing the conflict to spin out of control as they took increasingly assertive postures, moving thousands of troops into the disputed region. Indian politicians, including Mr. Modi, have made several visits to the Ladakh region. During one, Mr. Modi donned a military jacket to address soldiers.
As the standoff has grown, India has increased its focus on Ladakh, spending millions of dollars to build roads along its side of the Chinese border, particularly in areas where its positioning was weak and China had a terrain advantage.
Among the remaining contention points between the two armies is an eastern region called the Depsang Plains. Military analysts said that the Chinese Army was not allowing Indian troops to patrol in that area, even though they have done so for decades. While India's military is already stretched thin, said Saurav Jha, editor in chief of the Delhi Defense Review, it still needs to keep up a permanent patrol to deter China.
Konchok Stanzin, a local politician from eastern Ladakh, said the announcement would ease worries among people in the region. But local shepherds have lost grazing areas as the land has become buffer zones, he said.
"If there is complete disengagement, people will feel good about it," he said. "Peace is important for emotional well-being of the people."
LONDON Never, perhaps, has an heir been more ready for the crown.
Charles, the eldest son of Queen Elizabeth II and a man born to be king, acceded to the throne on Thursday after being the designated successor for longer than anyone in the history of the British monarchy. As King Charles III, he will become sovereign of the world's most important constitutional monarchy, head of the most storied royal family, and a symbol of continuity in a storm-tossed country.
Having aged from an awkward, self-doubting young man into an unhappy middle-aged husband, Charles has become, at 73, a self-assured, gray-haired eminence, steeped in causes like climate change and environmental protection, which were once quirky but now seem peculiarly in sync with the times.
Whether Charles will ever enjoy the respect or affection showered on his mother is another question. Thrust on to the throne at 25, Elizabeth reigned for longer than most Britons have been alive, anchoring her country with stoic dignity as it made a turbulent passage from globe-spanning empire to reluctant member of the European Union to an uncertain future after Brexit.
Charles's journey was, perhaps inevitably, less acclaimed. His foibles and frustrations were mercilessly dissected by the news media; his pet hobbies, from architecture criticism to organic farming, were frequently mocked; his marriage to Diana, Princess of Wales, which crumbled amid lurid tabloid headlines and mutual charges of infidelity, remains for many the defining event of his public life.
At the nadir of Charles's public life, in the mid-1990s, some critics went so far as to say that the scandal-scarred heir had forfeited the right to be king and that the crown should skip a generation, going to his elder son, Prince William, who was untarnished by public blemishes.
Nothing, of course, compared to his marriage to Diana. The seamy tabloid stories, the tell-all TV interviews ("There were three of us in this marriage," Diana said to the BBC, referring to her husband and Camilla Parker-Bowles, whom he later married), the bitter divorce and Diana's death in a car crash in Paris in 1997 all of it crystallized the image held by many of Charles as an oafish cad and his family as unfeeling in-laws.
From 1991 to 1996, the percentage of people who said they thought Charles would make a good king plunged to 41 percent from 82 percent, according to the polling firm MORI. But Diana's death proved a turning point: Charles worked with Tony Blair, the prime minister at the time, to nudge his mother into honoring Diana's memory, amid a national outpouring of grief, and then set about rehabilitating his own image.
He has mostly succeeded. Few Britons now recoil at the prospect of King Charles III, even if he sometimes seems more a fuddy-duddy uncle than a national patriarch.
Married since 2005 to Camilla, with whom he was romantically involved before and during his marriage to Diana, Charles has found stability in his personal life. With the death of his father, Prince Philip, at 99, last year, he became paterfamilias of the House of Windsor. Camilla, 75, who will take the title of queen consort, is a sturdy and respectable presence at his side.
But Charles takes the helm of a royal family that has been rocked by a series of upheavals: a bitter falling-out with his younger son, Prince Harry, and his American-actress wife, Meghan, and the unsavory ties of his brother Prince Andrew with the financier Jeffrey Epstein, which resulted in a civil suit against Andrew accusing him of sexual abuse of a teenager. Charles has struggled to keep wayward family members in line.
He has also long pushed to streamline the monarchy, partly to reduce its drain on the public purse. As king, he will be able to put that plan fully into action. The end of the second Elizabethan Age thus promises to be a momentous transition, not just because of the passing of a beloved queen but also because Charles will bring his own ideas into a job for which he has spent a lifetime preparing.
"The style will be very different," said Vernon Bogdanor, a professor of government at King's College London who has written about the role of the monarchy in Britain's constitutional system. "He will be an active king and he will probably push his prerogatives to the limits, but he won't go beyond them."
Charles, he said, fought to carve out an identity as the Prince of Wales, a role that he held longer than anyone but that comes without a job description. He founded formidable charities like the Prince's Trust, which has helped nearly a million disadvantaged young people, and championed causes like sustainable urban planning and environmental protection, long before they became fashionable.
In recent years, he has taken on several of the queen's duties, from foreign trips to investitures, where people are granted knighthoods. On Remembrance Day, he placed a wreath at the monument to Britain's fallen soldiers on her behalf. At the state opening of Parliament, he escorted her into the Palace of Westminster.
Charles has also not hesitated to wade into fraught political issues. He has spoken out regularly for religious tolerance and against Islamophobia, which some credit with helping mute a potential backlash against Muslims after a series of deadly terrorist attacks carried out by Islamic extremists in London in 2005.
"He could have spent his time in nightclubs or doing nothing at all, but he's found a role," said Professor Bogdanor.
At times, Charles's strong opinions have gotten him into hot water. In 1984, he famously ridiculed a proposed extension to the National Gallery as a "monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much-loved and elegant friend." The plan was scrapped, but years later, prominent architects complained that his backdoor lobbying against designs that he did not favor was an abuse of his constitutional role.
As king, Charles will have to keep his opinions to himself. His mother was so discreet that royal watchers could not decipher her positions even on furiously debated issues like Brexit. Charles, too, was careful not to opine on Brexit, though he gave a glimpse into his thinking when he told the German Parliament in 2020 that "no country is really an island" and pleaded for Germany to keep working with Britain.
It is not clear whether Charles will continue his extensive philanthropy. He is a patron or president of more than 400 charities, in addition to the Prince's Trust. But his philanthropic work has not been without problems: The chief executive of another of Charles's charities, Michael Fawcett, resigned after he was accused of promising to obtain a knighthood for a billionaire Saudi donor.
For some, the scandal laid bare one of Charles's biggest weaknesses: a lack of judgment about those around him. Advisers had long questioned the conduct of Mr. Fawcett, who had served as the prince's valet before ascending into powerful posts in his charity network. But Charles, whose spokesman said he had not been aware of the cash-for-honors accusation, hung on to Mr. Fawcett stubbornly.
Charles is still not overly popular. Last year, he was picked as the favorite member of the royal family by just 11 percent of those surveyed, according to Ipsos MORI, trailing the queen; William and his wife, Kate; Harry and Meghan; Princess Anne; Prince Philip; and any of the queen's great-grandchildren.
But for now, the future of the monarchy seems secure: 43 percent of people said Britain would be worse off without it, while only 19 percent said it would be better off, and 31 percent said there would be no difference. Those numbers barely budged even after Harry and Meghan gave a sensational interview to Oprah Winfrey in which they accused the royal family of callous and racist treatment.
For Charles, the biggest personal challenge may be healing the rift with his son. Harry told Ms. Winfrey that his father had stopped taking his calls for a while. "There's a lot of hurt that has happened," Harry said. There is little sign of a reconciliation, and Harry is writing a memoir that people close to Buckingham Palace fear will reopen the wounds from the couple's split with the family.
Charles must also deal with the legal fallout from his brother Andrew's relationship with Mr. Epstein. He moved swiftly to sideline Andrew from royal duties after his brother gave a damning interview to the BBC in a misbegotten effort to clear his name. Royal watchers said it was a sign, even before his mother died, that Charles was cementing his role as the leader of the family and a king in waiting.
"He has grown in stature in recent years," said Penny Junor, a royal historian. "He's looking like a much more confident character, happier in his own skin."
LONDON Queen Elizabeth II, Britain's longest-serving monarch, whose broadly popular seven-decade reign survived tectonic shifts in her country's post-imperial society and weathered successive challenges posed by the romantic choices, missteps and imbroglios of her descendants, died on Thursday at Balmoral Castle in Scotland, her summer retreat. She was 96.
The royal family announced her death online, saying she had "died peacefully." The announcement did not specify a cause.
Her death elevated her eldest son, Charles, to the throne, as King Charles III. In a statement, he said:
"The death of my beloved Mother, Her Majesty the Queen, is a moment of the greatest sadness for me and all members of my family.
"We mourn profoundly the passing of a cherished Sovereign and a much-loved Mother. I know her loss will be deeply felt throughout the country, the Realms and the Commonwealth, and by countless people around the world."
Earlier Thursday, Buckingham Palace said that the queen had been placed under medical supervision and that her doctors were "concerned" about her health. She had remained at Balmoral for much of the summer. On Wednesday evening, she abruptly canceled a virtual meeting with members of her Privy Council after her doctors advised her to rest.
On Tuesday, she met with the incoming Conservative prime minister, Liz Truss the 15th prime minister the queen dealt with during her reign though in doing so, because of infirmity, she broke with longstanding tradition by receiving her at Balmoral rather than at Buckingham Palace.
Elizabeth's long years as sovereign were a time of enormous upheaval, in which she sought to project and protect the royal family as a rare bastion of permanence in a world of shifting values.
At her coronation on June 2, 1953, a year after she acceded to the throne, she surveyed a realm emerging from an empire of such geographical reach that it was said the sun never set on it. But by the new century, as she navigated her advancing years with increasing frailty, the frontiers had shrunk back. As Britain prepared to leave the European Union in 2020, a clamor for independence in Scotland was rekindled, potentially threatening to narrow her horizons yet further.
Her coronation was the first royal event of its kind to be broadcast almost in full on television. But it was a token of the changes and global fascination that accompanied her time as queen that her reign became the subject of a Hollywood movie and a blockbuster series on Netflix, while her family's travails offered voluminous grist to the busy mill of social media.
Just as telling in the chronicles of her rule, Britons' unquestioning deference to the crown had been supplanted by a gamut of emotions ranging from loyal and often affectionate tolerance to unbridled hostility. The monarchy was forced, more than ever, to justify its existence in the face of often skeptical public attention and scrutiny.
Elizabeth, though, remained determinedly committed to the hallmark aloofness, formality and pageantry by which the monarchy has long sought to preserve the mystique that underpinned its existence and survival. Her courtly and reserved manner changed little.
As the coronavirus pandemic of 2020 spread to Britain, forcing people to suspend their normal lives and social ways, the queen left Buckingham Palace, in central London, for Windsor Castle, west of the capital, a move that recalled the decades she had spent inspiring genuine affection among many Britons.
It was to Windsor that she and her younger sister, Margaret, were sent to escape the threat of German bombing after the outbreak of World War II in 1939. It was from Windsor, too, that she made her first radio broadcast as a princess in 1940, age 14, ostensibly directed at British children who had been evacuated to North America, according to her biographer Ben Pimlott, but also intended to sway official thinking in Washington, which had not yet entered the war.
"My sister, Margaret Rose, and I feel so much for you, as we know from experience what it means to be away from those we love most of all," Elizabeth said then.
In 2020, too, she sought to equate her plight with that of her subjects. "Many of us will need to find new ways of staying in touch with each other and making sure that loved ones are safe," she said in a statement released after she and her husband, Prince Philip, arrived at Windsor. "I am certain that we are up to that challenge. You can be assured that my family and I stand ready to play our part."
On April 5, 2020, in a televised address that evoked her 1940 broadcast, she urged her subjects to fight the virus with the same bulldog tenacity that wartime Britons had shown. It was only the fourth special broadcast of her monarchy outside of her scheduled TV appearances at Christmas.
"I hope in the years to come everyone will be able to take pride in how they responded to this challenge," she said. "And those who come after us will say that the Britons of this generation were as strong as any."
She added, "We should take comfort that while we may have more still to endure, better days will return. We will be with our friends again; we will be with our families again; we will meet again," the last line a direct reference to a wartime song by Vera Lynn, "We'll Meet Again."
In 2017, Elizabeth celebrated the 70th anniversary of her marriage to Philip, whom she first met when he was a teenager in the 1930s. Until his death last April, Philip had settled into an unusual role, usually two steps behind his wife, providing her with stoic support, even if his occasional tactless comments hurt his image.
Despite many reports of early peccadilloes on Philip's part hidden from public view with the help of cooperative newspaper barons their bonds endured, a throwback to earlier decades of more durable relationships. And his death, their second son, Prince Andrew, said, "left a huge void in her life."
Some predicted that Elizabeth would recede into the shadows after Philip's death, much as Queen Victoria did after the death of her husband, Prince Albert. But she surprised many by re-emerging as a spry presence in public life, entertaining world leaders at a summit meeting in Cornwall in June 2021 and playing host to Bill Gates and other businesspeople at Windsor Castle after a climate-change investment conference.
Still, the hectic schedule took a toll. Elizabeth was photographed using a walking stick, a rare concession to her stiff knees. She was kept overnight in a London hospital in October 2021 after what aides said was an episode of exhaustion. Few doubted the effect of the loss of Philip, who had been a stabilizing force in the family.
Elizabeth's own children seemed less immune to marital calamity.
In 1992, Prince Charles and his immensely popular wife, Diana, agreed to separate, as did Prince Andrew and his wife, Sarah Ferguson. Elizabeth's second child, Princess Anne, divorced her husband, Mark Phillips, the same year. Coupled with a series of other upheavals, the queen labeled 1992 her "annus horribilis."
But worse was to come.
In 1997, the death of Diana in a car crash in Paris wrote some of the darkest chapters of Elizabeth's reign, and for a while the monarchy itself seemed threatened by a huge wave of public support for Diana that left the queen seeming cold and emotionally estranged from her subjects.
The monarchy survived, but well into the 21st century new challenges emerged.
In 2019, Elizabeth was dragged unceremoniously and against all previous rules of protocol into political machinations over Brexit, as Britain's withdrawal from the European Union was known, a debate from which she would once have remained remote.
In the same year, Prince Andrew became embroiled in scandal after giving a disastrous television interview in which he seemed unaware of the toxic impact of a friendship with Jeffrey Epstein, the convicted American sexual predator. Accused of sexual impropriety with a teenage girl introduced to him by Mr. Epstein an allegation he has denied the prince, also known as the Duke of York, withdrew from public life that November. (In January this year, he was forced by Buckingham Palace to relinquish his military titles and royal charities, a stinging rebuke by the royal family a day after a federal judge in New York allowed a sexual abuse case against him to go ahead.)
In her annual Christmas address to the nation in 2019, the queen described the year as "bumpy."
It was about to get bumpier.
In 2020, in a move that was perhaps as humiliating as any family convulsion the queen had confronted, her grandson Prince Harry, the sixth in line to the throne, caught her and the rest of the family off guard when he and his American wife, Meghan Markle, announced plans to "step back" from royal duties a move that some commentators compared to the decision in 1936 by the queen's uncle, King Edward VIII, to abdicate so that he could proceed with plans to marry the American Wallis Simpson.
Yet far from carving out a "progressive new role within this institution," as they had hopefully declared, the young couple were forced into a hard exit, agreeing in a severance deal with Buckingham Palace to give up their loftiest royal titles, forgo state funding and repay at least $3 million in taxpayer money that had been used to refurbish their official residence on the grounds of Windsor Castle.
As the new decade unfolded and the end of Elizabeth's reign approached, it seemed as if the House of Windsor was under assault from within as never before, a process compounded with spectacular global fanfare by a two-hour television encounter between Meghan and Harry and Oprah Winfrey.
During the show, broadcast from California first in the United States, then a day later in Britain, the couple assailed an unidentified member of the royal household as racist. Ms. Winfrey said later that Prince Harry had assured her that he and his wife had not been referring to the queen or Prince Philip. In the interview, Ms Markle said that she had felt so isolated in her unaccustomed royal role that she had actively contemplated suicide.
Buckingham Palace was taken aback, and it responded with a terse, 61-word statement that sought to contain the drama within the familiar royal palisade of privacy. The royal family was "stunned to learn the full extent of how challenging the last few years have been for Harry and Meghan," the statement said.
"The issues raised, particularly that of race, are concerning," it said. "While some recollections may vary, they are taken very seriously and will be addressed by the family privately."
Despite the challenges, the queen pressed ahead with her Platinum Jubilee celebration in June this year to commemorate her seven decades as sovereign with a four-day public holiday, complete with a star-studded televised concert outside the gates of Buckingham Palace. But in the run-up to the occasion, the twin themes of failing health and family frictions seemed to blur together.
In February, she tested positive for the coronavirus, and in May she was forced by what Buckingham Palace called "episodic mobility issues" to cancel an appearance in Parliament to deliver a speech setting out the government's legislative agenda one of her most important public ceremonies.
It was the first time in almost 60 years that she had missed the event. She had been absent from it only twice before during her reign because of pregnancies with princes Andrew and Edward, her youngest child.
Significantly, Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, read the speech on her behalf, with the queen's bejeweled ceremonial crown the Imperial State Crown placed next to him, as if to assert her symbolic presence.
Just days earlier, her office had announced that when the royal family appeared on the balcony of Buckingham Palace during the proposed Platinum Jubilee regarded as the most potent of royal photo opportunities Prince Andrew, Prince Harry and his wife Meghan would not be present.
Ostensibly, their exclusions were because the monarch wished to limit attendance to "those members of the royal family who are currently undertaking official public duties on behalf of the Queen," in the words of a palace spokesman. But many Britons interpreted the move as a snub to family members who had brought unwelcome comment and unflattering headlines to the closing years of the queen's reign.
Prince Harry is one of eight grandchildren who, along with Elizabeth's four children, survive the queen, as do 12 great-grandchildren.
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said on Wednesday that he expected to meet in person next week with his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, setting up an encounter that could help the Kremlin expand its relationship with a country he called a "stable and reliable" partner.
In televised remarks at an economic conference in the far eastern Russian city of Vladivostok, Mr. Putin said he hoped to see Mr. Xi "soon," at a gathering of Asian leaders in Uzbekistan on Sept. 15 and 16.
Chinese officials did not immediately confirm that Mr. Xi would travel to Uzbekistan for the meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, an eight-nation group that also includes India, Pakistan and four Central Asian countries. But Russia's ambassador to China described the planned session as the leaders' "first full-fledged summit during the pandemic."
Mr. Putin's remarks came at the outset of a meeting that included Li Zhanshu, the head of the Chinese legislature and the third-highest-ranking member of the Chinese Communist Party.
The severing of economic ties with Western countries after its invasion of Ukraine has pushed Russia into a speedy reorientation of its economy toward Asia, most of all China, making any meeting with Mr. Xi particularly important.
While Beijing has not declared support for the invasion, it has echoed Kremlin talking points in describing the United States as the "main instigator" of the conflict. And it has provided Russia with much-needed economic support, both as a supplier of everything from cars to smartphones as European and American companies pull out of Russia and as a buyer of energy exports that are no longer in demand in the West.
The economic conference on Wednesday included discussions about the construction of a proposed pipeline to China that would be fed by natural gas from Siberian fields that was previously intended for European countries.
Mr. Putin said in a question-and-answer session that Moscow and Beijing had agreed on the main parameters of the new pipeline, and that he planned a separate meeting in Uzbekistan with Mr. Xi and the president of Mongolia, the country through which the proposed pipeline would pass.
"Our Chinese friends are difficult negotiators," Mr. Putin said, adding that Moscow and Beijing had agreed to pay for the Russian gas in their currencies. "However, they are stable and reliable partners and the market is colossal."
Russia, for its part, has offered geopolitical backing to China, including in the escalating tensions around Taiwan. And the country hosted Chinese troops for military exercises this month in far eastern Russia.
An in-person meeting between Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi who has not left China since the start of the coronavirus pandemic in 2020 could offer further symbolism of a Chinese-Russian alliance opposing a Western-led world order.
"This summit promises to be interesting, because it will be the first full-fledged summit during the pandemic," Russia's ambassador to China, Andrei Denisov, was quoted as saying on Wednesday by the Russian state-run Tass news agency.
MOSCOW On a recent evening in Red Square, a corps of elite paratroopers dressed in camouflage performed a battle-like dance with pyrotechnics. An Egyptian performer dressed as a pharaoh rode back and forth in a chariot wielding an ankh, the ancient Egyptian symbol of life, as a band played "Katyusha," a Soviet-era patriotic war song.
Nataliya Nikonova, 44, was one of thousands of spectators cheering from the bleachers at a festival celebrating the militaries of Russia and friendly nations including Belarus, India and Venezuela.
"I was so thrilled that I just about lost my voice!" she said.
Russia's army is now waging a slow-moving war that has left tens of thousands dead and contributed to global inflation and a surge in energy prices.
But Ms. Nikonova said she hadn't experienced many disruptions to her life in the past six months.
"Nothing has really changed," she said. "Sure, the prices went up, but we can endure that." She rushed off to listen to an encore of "Katyusha" from the Egyptian Military Symphonic Band.
Very little about day-to-day life seems to have changed in Moscow, where people have the financial resources to weather significant price increases, unlike much of the rest of the country. GUM, the luxury mall next to Red Square, is full of shoppers though many Western stores like Prada, Gucci and Christian Dior are closed and restaurants and theaters do thriving business. Moscow's roads still teem with luxury cars like Lamborghinis and Porsches.
"A few stores closed because of sanctions, which is frustrating but not that bad," said Yuliya, 18, a recent high-school graduate who was hanging out on a bench in Gorky Park, where Muscovites sunbathe, dance and rollerblade. She and her friends said they don't really think about the fighting in Ukraine that often.
That detachment is exactly what President Vladimir V. Putin is counting on as he executes a domestic strategy of shielding Russians from the hardships of war no draft, no mass funerals, no feelings of loss or conflict. Much of Russia's effort on the battlefield has not gone as Mr. Putin had planned, but at home, he has mostly succeeded in making Russian life feel as normal as possible.
Most museums and theaters are open, as long as their leadership didn't criticize the Kremlin, and on summer evenings, party boats with effusive revelers ply the nearby Moskva River and people picnic in the grass. The fall seasons in opera and ballet have just begun though a few anticipated premieres and ongoing productions have been canceled after their directors and stars spoke against the war or fled the country.
"What Russians normally do is protect their everyday lives," said Greg Yudin, a professor of political philosophy at the Moscow School of Social and Economic Sciences, describing a coping mechanism that dates from the Soviet period but became widespread during Mr. Putin's tenure.
"This is the thing that they always prioritize and that they excel at," he said of Russia's leadership, "and they are doing that now with a considerable degree of success, I would say."
But while many Muscovites embrace revelry and willful ignorance, many of the capital's intelligentsia, whose work and life tied them to the West or to Ukraine, are struggling to reconcile the feeling of normalcy with the enormity of being engaged in Europe's biggest land war since World War II.
That was evident on Saturday in the outpouring of sympathy and appreciation for the former Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, expressed by thousands of Russians attending his funeral, who represented a silent protest against Mr. Putin and his policies.
As soon as Russian tanks rolled into Ukraine, said Anya, she started reading books about the rise of totalitarianism in Nazi Germany and grappling with the concept of collective guilt.
"It was the end of the world for so many people," said Anya, 34. Like several others interviewed for this article, she did not want to provide her last name for fear of retribution.
"In your name, someone is killing civilians,'' she said. "And your country is turning into something like North Korea."
She said she went to a protest and signed an antiwar petition, and several days later, she was invited to resign from her job at a public institution.
For many years, Mr. Putin has been cracking down on dissent and protesters, but today it is almost impossible to express disenchantment with the system, and people expressing their views do so with the knowledge that a new law punishes criticism of the war. Almost 16,500 people have been arrested on charges of protesting the aggression in Ukraine since Feb. 24, according to OVD-Info, a Russian human rights organization.
Russians who oppose the fighting feel despised and threatened by their government, spurned by the West which they believe blames them for not protesting the invasion and powerless to bring about any change.
"We all have this feeling of impotence," said Anya. "The fact that you exist and have your opinion doesn't mean anything. There are five, 10, 20 million of us. And it doesn't make any difference."
Muscovites like Anya spent the first months after the conflict started anxious and uncertain. Tens of thousands of them fled. But over the summer, the capital largely returned to normal, buoyed by a soaring ruble, a silenced opposition and a news media almost completely under the Kremlin's control.
Still, society is changing slowly: While Mr. Putin has sought to infuse a sense of normalcy, he is also working to further militarize Russian society.
Along Moscow's artery roads there are billboards of soldiers listing their rank and title, with a QR code to scan for more information. And there is no shortage of events celebrating Russia's military might.
Thousands of spectators gathered at the Alabino army training ground southwest of Moscow over two weeks to watch the Army International Games, a festival that includes a Tank Biathlon, in which international teams compete to drive a tank through natural obstacles and fire accurately at targets. (Since 2013, when the competition started, Russia has always come in first place.)
"I've been seeing tanks on TV for all this time; I wanted to see them in real life," said Ilya, 34, who drove out to the event from Moscow with his children, 11 and 4.
"I think every war is bad; I am not saying I support the 'Special Military Operation,' or don't," he said, using Mr. Putin's term for the hostilities in Ukraine. "But I trust the leadership in my country, and if they say it is necessary, then it is."
Others said that seeing the weapons on display at the army festival including Kinzhal missiles being used in Ukraine made them feel as if they had come from a strong country.
Andrei Yevgenyevich, 55, who was a tank driver in Soviet-controlled Germany in the last days of the Cold War, said the weapons display brought him back to the days when the Soviet Union was a strong and feared global power.
"When you see this, you trust that all is well in your country, that everything is as it should be," he said.
"We were raised in the Soviet tradition, and we love our motherland. This brings pride to our country."
As for the sanctions, he said: "I don't feel any difference. I think America and the West are suffering far more."
This is a common refrain on Russian television. State-run media produce daily segments about the uncertainty countries like Germany are facing over gas prices and soaring inflation in Europe and the United States.
At the army training grounds, children scrambled over tanks, including one that said, "Smash the Fascists," and people of all ages shot automatic rifles. But booths inviting visitors to sign a contract to join the army stood empty, save for the recruiters, indicating that even if nationalism is rising, people are not ready to fight Mr. Putin's war.
"Not a lot of people are coming right now," one military recruiter said, declining to give his name, as the sounds of shots from the nearby firing range could be heard.
WASHINGTON Russia is buying millions of artillery shells and rockets from North Korea, according to newly declassified American intelligence, a sign that global sanctions have severely restricted its supply chains and forced Moscow to turn to pariah states for military supplies.
The disclosure comes days after Russia received initial shipments of Iranian-made drones, some of which American officials said had mechanical problems. U.S. government officials said Russia's decision to turn to Iran, and now North Korea, was a sign that sanctions and export controls imposed by the United States and Europe were hurting Moscow's ability to obtain supplies for its army.
The United States provided few details from the declassified intelligence about the exact weaponry, timing or size of the shipment, and there is no way yet to independently verify the sale. A U.S. official said that, beyond short-range rockets and artillery shells, Russia was expected to try to purchase additional North Korean equipment going forward.
"The Kremlin should be alarmed that it has to buy anything at all from North Korea," said Mason Clark, who leads the Russia team at the Institute for the Study of War.
Before Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the White House began declassifying intelligence reports about Moscow's military plans then disclosing that material, first to allies privately and then to the public. After something of a lull in the disclosures, the American government has once again begun declassifying information to highlight the struggles of Russia's military, including the recent intelligence about the purchase of Iranian drones and the Russian army's problems recruiting soldiers.
Broad economic sanctions, at least so far, have not crippled Russia. Energy prices, driven up by the invasion, have filled its treasury and enabled Moscow to blunt the fallout of its banks being cut off from international finance and curbs on exports and imports. Sanctions against individual Russian oligarchs also have failed to undercut the power of President Vladimir V. Putin.
But American officials said that, when it came to Russia's ability to rebuild its military, the economic actions of Europe and the United States had been effective. American and European sanctions have blocked Russia's ability to buy weaponry, or electronics to make that weaponry.
Moscow had hoped that China would be willing to buck those export controls and continue to supply the Russian military. But in recent days, American officials have said that while China was willing to buy Russian oil at a discount, Beijing, at least so far, has respected the export controls aimed at Moscow's military and not tried to sell either military equipment or components.
Gina Raimondo, the commerce secretary, has repeatedly warned China that if Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation, China's largest computer chip maker, or other companies violate sanctions against Russia, the United States will effectively shut down those businesses, cutting off their access to the American technology they need to make semiconductors.
With most countries treading carefully in the face of American pressure, Russia has focused its deal making on Iran and North Korea.
Both Iran and North Korea are largely cut off from international commerce thanks to American and international sanctions, meaning neither country has much to lose by cutting deals with Russia. Any deal to buy weaponry from North Korea would be a violation of United Nations resolutions aimed at curbing weapons proliferation from Pyongyang.
It is unclear how much the purchasing from North Korea has to do with the export controls, however. There is nothing high-tech in a 152-millimeter artillery shell or a Katyusha-style rocket that North Korea produces, said Frederick W. Kagan, a military expert at the American Enterprise Institute.
A U.S. official said the new deal with North Korea showed the desperation in Moscow. And Mr. Kagan said turning to North Korea was a sign that Russia was seemingly unable to produce the simplest materiel needed to wage war.
"The only reason the Kremlin should have to buy artillery shells or rockets from North Korea or anyone is because Putin has been unwilling or unable to mobilize the Russian economy for war at even the most basic level," Mr. Kagan said.
Restricting Russia's military supply chain is a central part of the American strategy to weaken Moscow, with the aim to hamper both its war effort in Ukraine and its future ability to threaten its neighbors.
It has been clear for months, both from Russian operations in Ukraine and disclosures by the U.S. government, that Moscow has struggled with its high-tech weaponry. Precision-guided weaponry, like cruise missiles, has experienced high rates of failure. In the early stages of the war, half or more of those weapons either failed to fire or failed to hit their targets.
Russian stocks of those precision weapons have also been depleted, forcing generals to rely less often on missiles and instead build their strategy around a brutal artillery assault that has laid waste to towns in Ukraine's eastern region.
The disclosure that Russia is seeking more artillery ammunition is a sign that Moscow's supply problems are likely deeper than just high-end components for cutting-edge tanks or precision missiles. If Russia is seeking more artillery shells from North Korea, it is facing a shortage or could see one in the future, and its industrial base is struggling to meet the military demands of the war.
"This is very likely an indication of a massive failure of the Russian military industrial complex that likely has deep roots and very serious implications for the Russian armed forces," Mr. Kagan said.
In recent weeks, Ukraine has stepped up its assault on Russian ammunition depots. Ukraine's forces have used the American High Mobility Artillery Rocket System, or HIMARS, and U.S. intelligence reports, to strike behind the front lines and destroy ammunition caches.
While it is not clear what impact that offensive has had on overall stocks of ammunition, Russia was forced to pull back and move its ammunition storage points, reducing the effectiveness of its artillery forces.
There have also been signs that the effectiveness of some Russian artillery shells has been degraded because of storage problems or poor maintenance of its ammunition stocks. To be most effective at wounding opposing troops, artillery shells burst in the air, just before they hit the ground. But the crater pattern created by Russian artillery forces over the summer showed that many of their shells were exploding on the ground, reducing the damage to Ukrainian trenches.
While the condition of North Korean artillery shells is not clear, the country has extensive stocks of the ammunition.
WASHINGTON It is the element of President Biden's foreign policy that overlaps most significantly with his domestic agenda: defending democracy.
His drive to buttress democracy at home and abroad has taken on more urgency as Russia wages war in Ukraine, China expands its power and former President Donald J. Trump and his Republican supporters attack American democratic norms and fair elections.
In a speech in Philadelphia last week, Mr. Biden warned about the threat to democracy in the United States and said American citizens were in "a battle for the soul of this nation."
Even as he hammers home that message ahead of the U.S. midterm elections, Mr. Biden's efforts to bolster democracy abroad are about to come into sharper focus. The White House is expected to announce a second multinational Summit for Democracy. And the National Security Strategy, which could be released this month, will highlight reinforcement of democracies as a policy priority, officials say.
On his most recent overseas trip, Antony J. Blinken, the secretary of state, announced in the Democratic Republic of Congo that the United States would help the country with "preparations for next year's free, fair and on-time elections" an emphasis on the sanctity of elections that echoes Mr. Biden's defense of the 2020 U.S. presidential election against Mr. Trump's persistent attempts to undermine its results.
Pursuing parallel policies to strengthen democracy at home and abroad allows the Biden administration to focus on a single central message, while the president's political aides shape the identity of the Democratic Party around it.
And it gives Mr. Biden the standing to claim he is the torchbearer of an American foreign policy tradition that contrasts sharply with Mr. Trump's isolationist "America First" approach and praise for autocrats. That tradition, liberal internationalism, revolves around the idea that global stability comes from democratic systems, free markets and participation in American-led multinational organizations.
"I think the rhetorical and I would say sincerely moral emphasis is welcome, as is the effort to draw democracies together," said Larry Diamond, a scholar of democracy at Stanford University.
But in recent years, liberal internationalism has come under criticism from politicians, policymakers and scholars well beyond the Trump camp, and Mr. Biden risks being seen as naive or imperialistic in centering his foreign policy on strengthening democracies.
Critics point to the disastrous wars and nation-building efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan that were carried out in the name of democracy. And they say the decades-long American push for free trade and open markets has fueled global inequality, environmental catastrophe and the empowerment of authoritarian figures and groups like the Chinese Communist Party, which now presents an anti-democratic but materially successful governance model to the world.
Officials in the Biden administration say they are approaching the defense of democracy with a sense of humility and are open to learning from other nations.
On his travels last month, Mr. Blinken unveiled a new U.S. strategy for Africa that has democracy support at its core. But he also said at a news conference in Kinshasa, Congo's capital, that the United States did not "want a one-sided, transactional relationship."
He praised Congo for being a "strong participant" in the Summit for Democracy that Mr. Biden convened in Washington last year.
Congo is a nascent democracy. After a troubled presidential election in 2019, it had its first peaceful transfer of power. Mr. Blinken promised the country an additional $10 million "to promote peaceful political participation and transparency" in elections next year, for a total of $24 million in such programs overseen by the United States Agency for International Development.
Mr. Biden's aides say their approach emphasizes "democratic resilience" rather than "democracy promotion," unlike efforts by earlier administrations. They argue they are strengthening democratic nations and cooperation among them rather than pushing for changes of political systems or governments.
The framing is defensive rather than offensive, with a recognition that democracies are under threat, often from internal forces, in ways they have not been in decades.
And the officials also say global challenges like climate change, the pandemic and economic recovery are best addressed by democracies working in concert.
Furthermore, they argue, no other recent administration has had to rally partners and allies urgently to confront the challenges posed by both China and Russia, which in different ways are undermining what U.S. officials call the "rules-based international order." Administration officials say there is a competition between democracies and autocracies to demonstrate which can deliver for their people and the world.
But in tackling those broad issues, the Biden administration will have to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to work with authoritarian nations or prioritize the principles in its "democracy versus autocracy" line.
"It makes it more difficult when you're framing it this narrowly to reach out to those states you might need," said Emma Ashford, a senior fellow on foreign policy at the Stimson Center. "It might leave out space for more global issues the things you might need to talk to autocracies about."
In the Middle East, Mr. Biden has visibly calibrated his position on autocracies, meeting in July with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia despite vowing earlier to make that nation a "pariah" for the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a columnist for The Washington Post, by Saudi operatives. Mr. Biden's aides said the president was focused on working with Saudi Arabia on diplomacy with Israel, global energy security, competition with China and ending the Yemen war.
And the officials say the United States still needs to find ways to cooperate with Russia and China on certain issues: the nuclear programs of Iran and North Korea, climate change and the pandemic, for starters.
To oppose Russia's war in Ukraine, the Biden administration has had to work closely with Hungary and Turkey, countries that, though members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, have become synonymous with the erosion of democracy.
Viktor Orban, the prime minister of Hungary, presents a complicated challenge. As he dismantles his country's democratic norms and promotes nationalism based on ethnic and religious identity, he has emerged as a role model for many American conservatives. Last month, he got a hero's welcome when he spoke at the Conservative Political Action Conference in Dallas.
And prominent American conservative political figures, including Stephen K. Bannon, Mr. Trump's former adviser, have said they want to create alliances between right-wing populist groups in Europe which often embrace anti-democratic values and ones in the United States.
This growing intersection of politics abroad and in the United States brings into sharp relief what a senior Biden official calls the "interconnected" foreign and domestic policy efforts in the administration to strengthen democracy.
But Mr. Diamond said there is a shortfall in the material resources the administration has devoted to bolstering democracy abroad. For one thing, he said, the United States must ensure it and its democratic partners are perceived as militarily stronger than their autocratic rivals. That means not only repelling the Russian invasion of Ukraine, he said, but also accelerating weapons deliveries to Taiwan so the island can deter a potential invasion by China.
He added that the Biden administration also needed to increase its public diplomacy efforts to turn international opinion against Russia and China, pointing to the difficulties that U.S. officials have had in getting member states of the United Nations to approve resolutions condemning Russia for the war in Ukraine.
"Russia and China, with their vast propaganda apparatuses, have made very significant inroads, particularly in terms of elite opinion and dialogue," Mr. Diamond said.
Mr. Biden has requested hundreds of millions of dollars from Congress for pro-democracy initiatives, including two programs aimed at supporting anti-corruption efforts, independent journalism, elections and pro-democracy activists.
Officials around the world will be watching to see exactly how the United States carries out those programs and whether Washington can now avoid the pitfalls that Western powers have had in trying to spread ideas and practices abroad.
At a news conference with Mr. Blinken in Pretoria, the foreign minister of South Africa, Naledi Pandor, said the United States should work with African nations as equals and use tools already developed by Africans.
"To come in and seek to teach a country that we know how democracy functions and we've come to tell you, 'You do it. It'll work for you' I think it leads to defeat," she said. "So we need to think in different ways."
Some analysts note that several African nations with strongman rulers were excluded from Mr. Biden's democracy summit in December, including Rwanda and Uganda, to the potential detriment of U.S. policy on the continent.
"That selectivity already puts leaders and countries in a state of criticism to the U.S.," said Bob Wekesa, a scholar at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. "They are on a collision path already."
LONDON As a passionate 19-year-old student at Oxford in 1994, Elizabeth Truss called for a referendum to abolish the British monarchy, telling an audience of fellow Liberal Democrats, "We do not believe that people should be born to rule."
Three decades later, Ms. Truss, now 47 and known as Liz, will travel to a Scottish castle on Tuesday to be anointed by Queen Elizabeth II as Britain's new prime minister, completing a political odyssey from rabble-rousing republican to tradition-cloaked leader of the Conservative Party.
Ms. Truss long ago pivoted to embrace the monarchy as being good for British democracy, just as she long ago abandoned the Liberal Democrats for the Conservatives. More recently, she switched sides on Brexit, opposing the drive for Britain to leave the European Union before the 2016 referendum, then reversing course to become one of its most ardent evangelists.
Her ideological dexterity critics would call it opportunism has helped propel Ms. Truss to the pinnacle of British politics. How well it will prepare her for the rigors of the job is another question, given the dire economic trends enveloping the country, and a Tory party that seems torn between desire for a fresh start and regret about tossing out her flamboyant, larger-than-life predecessor, Boris Johnson.
By her own admission, Ms. Truss has little of Mr. Johnson's charisma. Awkward where he is easygoing, staccato where he is smooth, she nevertheless scaled the party's ranks with what colleagues describe as nerve, drive and an appetite for disruptive politics. When Mr. Johnson fell into trouble, she positioned herself adroitly, never publicly breaking with him while staying in the spotlight as a hawkish foreign secretary.
"She has so much confidence in her instincts," said Marc Stears, a political scientist who tutored Ms. Truss when she was at Oxford. "She is willing to take risks and say the kinds of things that other people aren't willing to say. Sometimes, that works for her; other times, it hurts her."
Wooden in public, Ms. Truss is fun in private, friends say, with a direct, informal manner, a weakness for karaoke and an unabashed love for the pop star Taylor Swift. She once shared a selfie with Ms. Swift from an awards show, adding the caption, "Look what you made me do," the title of one of Ms. Swift's hit songs.
Ms. Truss will need all her instincts and agility to navigate the job she is inheriting from Mr. Johnson. Drummed out of office by his party's lawmakers after a string of scandals, he has left behind a daunting pile of problems, not unlike those that confronted Margaret Thatcher when she became Britain's first female prime minister in 1979 during a previous period of economic hardship.
Ms. Truss has modeled herself on Thatcher, posing on a tank like her heroine once did in West Germany and wearing silk pussy-bow blouses, a staple of the Thatcher wardrobe. But her politics more closely resemble those of another hero of the right, Ronald Reagan: a clarion call for lower taxes and smaller government, coupled with a celebration of post-Brexit Britain as an "aspiration nation."
That message appealed to the 160,000 or so mostly white and mostly aging members of the Conservative Party, who chose it over the hard truths offered by her opponent, Rishi Sunak, a former chancellor of the Exchequer. Now, she will have to pivot yet again, to lead a diverse, divided country facing its worst economic news in a generation.
"One of the things that has benefited Liz Truss is that she's tribal," said Jill Rutter, a senior research fellow at U.K. in a Changing Europe, a research institute in London. "She's very willing to embrace everything about a team. The trouble with being a team player is she now needs to define the agenda."
Born in 1975, four years before Thatcher took power, Ms. Truss grew up in an avowedly left-wing family, with a father who was a mathematician and a mother who was a teacher and nurse. She talks often of going to a public high school in the hard-knocks city of Leeds, which she said "let down" its students with low expectations, little opportunity and a local council caught in the grip of political correctness.
Some of her contemporaries dispute her account of her school days. They note that she grew up in a comfortable district of the city that long voted Conservative. They also accuse her of slighting her teachers, who helped her gain admission after a year living in Canada with her family to Merton College, one of the most academically rigorous of the Oxford colleges.
At Oxford, Ms. Truss studied philosophy, politics and economics, an elite degree program that has produced a club of prominent politicians, including a former prime minister, David Cameron. Some have criticized the program for putting a premium on being smooth-talking and a quick study. But Mr. Stears said Ms. Truss did not conform to the cliche of a P.P.E. student.
"Her particular skill was not to master a brief or be glib or facile, but to come up with something unexpected," he said. "Every piece of work she came up with was provocative. She revels in controversy and provoking people."
Politics drew her early, and Ms. Truss became president of the Oxford University Liberal Democrats, where she campaigned to legalize marijuana. Soon after graduating in 1996, however, she switched to the Conservatives, a party then careering into the political wilderness. She worked in the private sector, for the energy giant Shell and for Cable & Wireless, qualifying as a chartered accountant.
In 2000, Ms. Truss married Hugh O'Leary, an accountant she met at a party conference and with whom she now has two daughters. Her personal life briefly threatened her career in 2005, after she had an extramarital relationship with a married member of Parliament, Mark Field, whom the party had appointed as her political mentor. Mr. Field's marriage broke up; Ms. Truss's survived.
Elected to Parliament in 2010 as a member for South West Norfolk, Ms. Truss went on to hold six ministerial jobs under three Conservative prime ministers. Her track record, people who know her said, was mixed, and she struggled with public speaking.
While serving as environment secretary in 2014, she was widely mocked for a speech in which she lightly noted that Britain imported two-thirds of its cheese, then switched to a scowl and added portentously, "That is a disgrace!"
She was more persuasive in campaigning against Britain's exit from the European Union. Speaking to a food and beverage industry group, Ms. Truss said, "I think the British people are sensible people. They understand fundamentally that economically, Britain will be better off staying in a reformed E.U."
After the 2016 vote, Ms. Truss reversed course to become a Brexit cheerleader. "I was wrong, and I am prepared to admit I was wrong," she said recently, contending that the warnings about the calamitous effects of Brexit had been overblown and that it had, in fact, unleashed benefits.
While few fault Ms. Truss for her youthful switch from Liberal Democrat to Tory, many criticize her retroactive endorsement of Brexit. "That's not a serious answer," said Ms. Rutter of U.K. in a Changing Europe. "The evidence is mounting up that if you make trade with your biggest trading partner more difficult, it hurts your economy."
The U-turn did not hinder her career. Ms. Truss cycled through jobs in the Justice Department and the Treasury before Mr. Johnson named her international trade minister in 2019. She roamed the world, signing post-Brexit trade agreements with Japan, Australia and other countries. Analysts noted they were largely cut-and-paste versions of European Union deals, but she reaped the publicity.
"Very early on, it appeared to me that she was a likely candidate for prime minister," said Robert E. Lighthizer, who opened talks on a trans-Atlantic deal with Ms. Truss as President Donald J. Trump's trade representative.
Along the way, Ms. Truss expressed a fascination with disruptive forces, like the ride-hailing service Uber. She once posted on Twitter that the younger generation of Britons were "#Uber-riding #Airbnb-ing #Deliveroo-eating #freedomfighters."
"She's been very keen to define herself as a disrupter and to make a link from that to a political approach that would benefit the country," said Bronwen Maddox, director of Chatham House, the London research institution. "There is something refreshing about that, as well as obviously a danger."
Like Thatcher, she also presents herself as a fierce defender of Western democracy. Elevated to foreign secretary in 2021, Ms. Truss outflanked even Mr. Johnson in her hard line against Russia. "Putin must lose in Ukraine," she declared last March during a visit to Lithuania. She held a famously icy meeting on the eve of the war with the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov.
Ms. Truss, colleagues say, will relish the prospect of facing off against Mr. Putin. But some predict her bigger nemesis will be Mr. Johnson. Ambitious and still popular with the Tory grass roots, he is likely to remain a news-making fixture one who could taunt Ms. Truss from the backbenches of Parliament or in a newspaper column, according to Gavin Barwell, who served as chief of staff to Mr. Johnson's predecessor, Theresa May.
"He's going to be like Banquo's ghost," Mr. Barwell said, referring to the apparition who tormented Shakespeare's Macbeth. "The moment she gets into political difficulty, there's going to be a bring-back-Boris movement."
CORONADO, Calif. Kyle Mullen always had the natural drive and talent that made success look easy. Until he tried out for the Navy SEALs.
The 24-year-old arrived on the California coast in January for the SEALs' punishing selection course in the best shape of his life even better than when he was a state champion defensive end in high school or the captain of the football team at Yale.
But by the middle of the course's third week a continual gut punch of physical and mental hardship, sleep deprivation and hypothermia that the SEALs call Hell Week the 6-foot-4 athlete from Manalapan, New Jersey, was dead-eyed with exhaustion, riddled with infection and coughing up blood from lungs that were so full of fluid that others who were there said later that he sounded like he was gargling.
The course began with 210 men. By the middle of Hell Week, 189 had quit or been brought down by injury. But Mullen kept on slogging for days, spitting blood all the while. The instructors and medics conducting the course, perhaps out of admiration for his grit, did not stop him.
And he made it. When he struggled out of the cold ocean at the end of Hell Week, SEAL leaders shook his hand, gave him a pizza and told him to get some rest. Then he went back to his barracks and laid down on the floor. A few hours later, his heart stopped beating and he died.
That same afternoon, another man who survived Hell Week had to be intubated. Two more were hospitalized that evening.
The SEAL teams have faced criticism for decades, both from outsiders and their own Navy leadership, that their selection course, known as Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL training, or BUD/S, is too difficult, too brutal, and too often causes concussions, broken bones, dangerous infections and near-drownings. Since 1953, at least 11 men have died.
For just as long, the SEAL teams, who perform some of the military's most difficult missions, including lighting-fast hostage rescues and the killing of high-level terrorists such as Osama bin Laden, have insisted that having a bare-knuckle rite of passage is vital for producing the kind of unflinching fighters the teams need. Without BUD/S, they argue, there could be no SEALs.
Privately, they talk of training casualties as a cost of doing business.
Mullen's official cause of death was bacterial pneumonia, but his family says the true cause was the course itself, in which instructors routinely drove candidates to dangerous states of exhaustion and injury, and medical staff grew so accustomed to seeing the suffering that they failed to hospitalize him, or even monitor him, once Hell Week was over.
"They killed him," his mother, Regina Mullen, who is a registered nurse, said in an interview. "They say it's training, but it's torture. And then they didn't even give them the proper medical care. They treat these guys worse than they are allowed to treat prisoners of war."
A New Complication
Mullen's death immediately resurfaced the old questions about whether the curriculum of intentional hardship goes too far.
And soon those old questions were complicated by something new.
When the Navy gathered Mullen's belongings, they discovered syringes and performance enhancing drugs in his car. The captain in charge of BUD/S immediately ordered an investigation, and soon about 40 candidates had either tested positive or had admitted using steroids or other drugs in violation of Navy regulations.
The Navy has not tied the sailor's death to drugs. The service is expected to release reports on the training death and the drug use in the fall. A Navy spokesperson declined to comment on Mullen's death or on allegations of widespread drug use, saying it would be inappropriate to do so before the reports are released and Mullen's family is briefed on their findings.
Still, the prevalence of drugs at BUD/S has some men in the top reaches of the SEALs deeply unnerved.
Without comprehensive testing, there is no way to assess the full extent of the drug use in the program. But more than a dozen current and former candidates described a culture in which drugs have become deeply embedded in the selection course over the past decade.
SEAL leaders say they don't have the authority to start a testing program to attack the problem. They formally requested permission from the Navy in June to start testing all candidates but are still awaiting a response.
Meanwhile, the drugs are there.
The Navy has made hundreds of changes over the years meant to improve safety and increase graduation rates. But no matter how much the Navy has tried to make BUD/S easier, it seems to only get harder.
In the 1980s, about 40% of candidates graduated. Over the past 25 years, the average has dropped to 26%. In 2021, it was just 14%, and in Mullen's class this year, less than 10%.
A Second Attempt
When Mullen started BUD/S in January, it was his second attempt. His first try was in August 2021, and he had spent more than a year running, swimming and lifting weights to prepare. He lasted less than a day.
Instructors call the first three weeks of BUD/S the attrition phase, a maw of punishing exercise, frigid water and harassment meant to wash out anyone lacking strength, endurance and mental fortitude individuals the instructors derisively call "turds."
That first day, the instructors put candidates through a gantlet of running, crawling, situps and pushups on the hot sand with no breaks, Mullen's mother said. Late in the afternoon, the men were racing in teams, carrying 170-pound inflatable boats over their heads, when Mullen passed out.
He called his mother from an ambulance a short time later and explained that he had not had a drop of water all day. When he fell, he told her, an instructor hurled insults at his limp body and told him to get up. When he did not respond, medics measured his temperature at 104 degrees and sent him to the hospital with heatstroke.
Mullen was assigned to an internal recovery unit, where he had four months to mend before a second attempt at BUD/S.
During his four-month wait, his mother recalled, Mullen started talking to her about performance-enhancing drugs.
Men he met in the recovery unit were using steroids and human growth hormone, he told her, and he was considering it. He told her he would have to buy a used car as a place to stash the drugs.
"In all his years playing sports, he had never touched that stuff," she said. "I told him not to do it. But he ended up getting the car and sharing it with a bunch of guys."
Outfoxing the Course
In a perverse way, the drug problem at BUD/S is a natural outgrowth of the mindset the SEALs try to cultivate, according Benjamin Milligan, a former enlisted SEAL who recently published a history of the force, "Water Beneath the Walls."
The SEALs want operators who can find unconventional ways to gain an advantage against the enemy, he said in an interview.
"You want guys who can solve problems in war, guys who know how to play dirty, because war is a dirty game," he said.
An often heard unofficial adage in the SEALs holds that, "if you ain't cheating, you ain't trying."
During BUD/S, he said, the "enemy" to be outfoxed is the course itself.
"No one can do everything the instructors ask, so you have to learn how to cheat to get through," he said. "Everyone knows it happens. The point is to learn how to not get caught."
"Basically, you are selecting for guys who are willing to cheat," he added. "So, no surprise, guys are going to turn to drugs."
In the months since Mullen's death, the family has pushed for accountability. The military is shielded by law from wrongful death lawsuits. Instead, Mullen's mother says her goal is to have Congress impose independent oversight on BUD/S.
Officers in charge of BUD/S have removed some of the most punishing aspects of the course in recent months, clamping down on predawn workouts and runs with heavy packs. Six hours of sleep a night are now required in all weeks but Hell Week; outside auditors have been brought in to watch instructors; and a higher percentage of sailors are now making the cut.
But on the beach, sailors say, the problems continue. A month after Mullen died, there was another close call. After late-night training in the frigid surf, one sailor cold, wet, hungry and exhausted started shivering violently, then became unresponsive while huddled in the arms of another sailor who was trying to keep him warm, according to two sailors who were there.
The sailors immediately called the BUD/S medical office, but they said there was no answer. They put their classmate in a hot shower, called 911 and were able to get him civilian medical help.
The next morning, the two sailors said, instructors let the class know they were not happy. To punish them for calling 911, the sailors said, the instructors made the class do long bouts of pushups. Whenever anyone dropped from exhaustion, instructors made the man who had been treated at the hospital for hypothermia plunge again into the cold surf.
MOSCOW Thousands of Russians on Saturday stood for several hours in snaking lines amid a heavy police presence to pay their respects to Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the last Soviet leader, who died on Tuesday.
Many Russians blame and revile Mr. Gorbachev for the breakup of the Soviet Union, but people of all ages, many of whom stood solemnly clutching flowers outside Moscow's famed House of the Unions, said that they had come to thank him for something severely restricted today in Russia: freedom.
"Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev gave us 30 years of sunlight," said Maksim, 20, a political science student, who carried a large sunflower to place before Mr. Gorbachev's body, which was lying in state in the building's grand hall.
"Unfortunately, this time has passed, and there is no more sun, only darkness," Maksim said. "But I am deeply grateful to him for these 30 years."
For many, the funeral was a vivid reminder of the rights that Russians have lost under the leadership of President Vladimir V. Putin and as a result of the almost complete dismantling of Mr. Gorbachev's legacy, culminating with the six-month-old war that Russia is prosecuting in Ukraine to take back former Soviet territory.
"For so many of us in Moscow, his death seems the death of democracy," said Veronika, 32, an art consultant. The New York Times is using only first names to protect the Russians in attendance from possible retaliation.
Amid the throngs, one person was conspicuously absent on Saturday: Mr. Putin. Citing a busy schedule, he did not attend the funeral. Instead, Mr. Putin paid his last respects to Mr. Gorbachev on Thursday, taking a bouquet of flowers to the hospital in Moscow where he died.
Mr. Putin's absence sent a clear message: While the Kremlin wanted to avoid any direct condemnation of a person who was once at its helm, it also wanted to distance itself from the symbol of an era whose legacy Mr. Putin is now largely trying to undo.
The funeral was a rare opportunity for like-minded Russians to gather in one place, though, at a time when protest and dissent have been effectively criminalized.
"They were burying their freedom and their hopes," said Andrei Kolesnikov, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace based in Moscow. "This is really such a peaceful and sad protest against what Putin was doing all these years and against Putin himself."
Mr. Gorbachev died this past week at age 91, after what the Central Clinical Hospital in Moscow said was "a long and grave illness." Mr. Gorbachev's admirers credit him with ending the Cold War and achieving significant strides in nuclear disarmament. Inside Russia, he gave "the people of the Soviet Union the possibility of being independent, of building their lives independently," his longtime interpreter, Pavel Palazhchenko, said in an interview.
On Saturday, inside the grand hall of the House of the Unions, known as the Hall of Pillars the same place where Russians bade farewell to Lenin and Stalin people filed past Mr. Gorbachev's open coffin, which was flanked by two honor guards. A mountain of flowers left by mourners lay on a long table in front of the coffin, which was beneath a Russian flag instead of the Soviet red banner.
Mr. Gorbachev's family members sat beside the coffin, and close friends, like Dmitri A. Muratov, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2021 (Mr. Gorbachev also received the prize, in 1990), sat nearby. In the early 1990s, Mr. Gorbachev helped found the newspaper that Mr. Muratov edits, Novaya Gazeta. The paper was forced to suspend publication in March, threatened by a new wartime censorship law, and the Russian authorities now seek to revoke its license.
There were so many mourners that guards urged people not to linger in front of Mr. Gorbachev's coffin. Many left the hall in tears.
"He gave us freedom, and peace, and music everything that is most dear to us," said Ekaterina, 75, who was crying as she exited onto the central Dmitrovka Street, which was cordoned off by law enforcement.
"Condolences to all of us because this also concerns you," she said, referring to the West and reflecting on how Mr. Gorbachev had opened Russia up to Europe and the United States.
Since Mr. Gorbachev's death on Tuesday, it was clear that the Kremlin would not accord him the pomp of the grand state ceremonies that characterized funerals of his Soviet predecessors.
And while the absence of foreign dignitaries who lionize Mr. Gorbachev for ending the Cold War was a sign of Russia's current isolation, many high-profile Russian figures did attend the ceremony on Saturday. Dmitri A. Medvedev, a former president; Sergei Stepashin, a former prime minister; and some popular culture figures, including Alla Pugacheva, a pop superstar, all paid their respects on Saturday.
Also in attendance were some who have been critical of Mr. Gorbachev's legacy, including Dmitri Kiselyov, the host of the flagship weekly news show on Russian state television.
Despite trying to distance himself from Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Putin on Wednesday acknowledged the last Soviet leader's legacy without praise, calling him "a politician and statesman who had a huge impact on the course of world history."
"He deeply understood that reforms were necessary," Mr. Putin added. "He strove to offer his own solutions to urgent problems."
Mr. Kolesnikov of the Carnegie Endowment said that Mr. Putin's "bunkerized" farewell to Mr. Gorbachev, a reference to the Russian president's increasing isolation since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic in 2020, was indicative of the Kremlin's attitude toward the man Mr. Putin blames for the collapse of the Soviet Union, which he sees as the "greatest geopolitical catastrophe" of the 20th century.
"It is a bit strange that the Gorbachev funeral took this unprecedented form," Mr. Kolesnikov said. "This is a marker of Putin's attitude toward Gorbachev. On the one hand, he can't be too close to his figure, but on the other hand, they can't ignore totally the scale."
The Kremlin said after Mr. Gorbachev's death that there would be only "elements of a state funeral," including an honor guard. By contrast, when Mr. Gorbachev's successor, Boris N. Yeltsin, died in 2007, Mr. Putin, who succeeded him, declared a day of national mourning for his funeral. The ceremony was broadcast live on state television, and the lowering of Mr. Yeltsin's coffin was accompanied by an artillery salute.
Mr. Yeltsin's funeral was attended by numerous foreign dignitaries, including acting state leaders and former ones such as Presidents Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush. Mr. Gorbachev's funeral was attended by Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary. Mr. Kolesnikov said that the presence of the far-right Hungarian leader, who has maintained close ties with Mr. Putin, was "insulting" to Mr. Gorbachev's legacy.
Though a number of foreign ambassadors paid their respects on Saturday, the absence of a wider group of global representatives at Mr. Gorbachev's ceremony highlighted Russia's isolation as its current leader is engaged in the brutal war in Ukraine.
As Mr. Gorbachev's rule divided Russia, so did his funeral. While thousands stood in line to pay their last respects, others called for recording every attendee. "These are the most decisive, brave, and sincere of all enemies of Russia," Igor Girkin, a former Russian intelligence colonel who took part in the conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine when it began in 2014, wrote on his Telegram channel.
After the ceremony on Saturday, Mr. Gorbachev was buried next to his wife, Raisa, at the Novodevichy Cemetery in Moscow. A few years before his death, in an interview with the documentary filmmaker Vitaly Mansky, Mr. Gorbachev said that his love for his wife had constituted the meaning of his life.
"What can be higher than the feeling of being in love and being loved by a woman?" he asked.
Another scene in the documentary was also telling: As Mr. Gorbachev celebrated the arrival of 2020 among a small group of associates, he sang along with the Russian national anthem, which played at the stroke of midnight.
When the choir sang the line, "Be glorious, our free fatherland!" Mr. Gorbachev's face lit up with a boyish smile.
"And who brought the freedom?" he said.
The United States secretly manufactured biological weapons in Ukraine. It trained birds to carry pathogens into Russia. It created Covid-19. It operated laboratories in Nigeria that engineered this year's outbreak of monkeypox.
Of the many falsehoods that the Kremlin has spread since the war in Ukraine began more than six months ago, some of the most outlandish and yet enduring have been those accusing the United States of operating clandestine biological research programs to wreak havoc around the globe.
The United States and others have dismissed the accusations as preposterous, and Russia has offered no proof. Yet the claims continue to circulate. Backed at times by China's diplomats and state media, they have ebbed and flowed in international news reports, fueling conspiracy theories that linger online.
In Geneva this week, Russia has commanded an international forum to air its unsupported assertions again. The Biological Weapons Convention, the international treaty that since 1975 has barred the development and use of weapons made of biological toxins or pathogens, gives member nations the authority to request a formal hearing of violations, and Russia has invoked the first one in a quarter-century.
"This is the military biological Pandora's box, which the United States has opened and filled more than once," Irina A. Yarovaya, the deputy chair of the Russia's lower house of Parliament, the State Duma, said last month. She is leading a parliamentary committee that was formed to "investigate" American support for biological research laboratories in Ukraine and elsewhere.
Virtually no Western officials or experts expect Russia to produce, during the weeklong gathering, facts that corroborate the accusations. If the past is any guide, that will not stop Russia from making them. Experts say Russia is likely to use the mere existence of the investigative session, much of which will take place behind closed doors, to give its claims a patina of legitimacy.
Russia's propaganda campaign has sought to justify the invasion ordered by President Vladimir V. Putin, who in April cited a "network of Western bioweapons labs" as one of the threats that forced Russia to act. More broadly, though, the flurry of accusations has sought to discredit the United States and its allies Ukraine's most powerful supporters and, increasingly, the source of arms being used to fight Russian forces.
Even when unsupported by fact, the accusations have played into pre-existing attitudes toward American dominance in foreign affairs. The consequence has been to sow division and doubt not necessarily to build support for Russia's invasion, but to deflect some of the blame to the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The notoriety of Russia's accusations about secret weapons production could also erode confidence in genuine biological research, much as the debate over the origins of Covid-19 has.
"The message is constantly about these labs, and that will erode confidence in that infrastructure and the work that's being performed," said Filippa Lentzos, an expert on biological threats and security at King's College London. "And it will significantly undermine global biosafety and biosecurity efforts, so it does have consequences."
Russia added the outbreak of monkeypox to its list of American transgressions in April. Gen. Igor A. Kirillov, the head of the Russian Army's radiological, chemical and biological defense force, insinuated that the United States had started the latest outbreak because it supported four research laboratories in Nigeria where the epidemic began to spread.
In the months after the general's comments, there were nearly 4,000 articles in Russian media, many of them shared on Twitter, Facebook and other social media platforms, according to research conducted by Zignal Labs for The New York Times.
For evidence of a conspiracy, some of the Russian reports pointed to a simulation in 2021 at the Munich Security Conference, an annual gathering of defense officials and experts from around the world. The simulation, intended to test how well countries would contain a new pandemic, posited a hypothetical monkeypox outbreak that began in a fictional country called Brinia and caused 270 million deaths.
The Russian reports circulated so widely that the advocacy group that designed the exercise, the Nuclear Threat Initiative, put out a statement in May trying to tamp down any misconception.
"We have no reason to believe that the current outbreak involves an engineered pathogen, as we have not seen any compelling evidence that would support such a hypothesis," the organization, based in Washington, wrote. "We also do not believe that the current outbreak has the potential to spread as rapidly as the fictional, engineered pathogen in our scenario or to cause such a high case fatality rate."
Russia's accusations have appeared in news reports in many countries, especially in Africa and the Middle East, regions that have become diplomatic battlegrounds between the United States, Russia and China.
The state media in China routinely amplifies Russian claims about the war with Ukraine and about secret biological weapons research, as part of its own information battle with the United States that began with the debate over the spread of Covid-19.
China's heavily censored internet, which aggressively stifles unwelcome political opinions, has also freely circulated conspiracy theories about a possible American role in the spread of monkeypox, as Bloomberg reported.
Russia's efforts to push the claims about biological weapons come from an old Russia propaganda playbook, adapted to the age of social media.
Researchers at the RAND Corporation called the Russian strategy a "fire hose of falsehood," inundating the public with huge numbers of claims that are designed to deflect attention and cause confusion and distrust as much as to provide an alternative point of view.
The strategy has roots reaching back to the Cold War.
In 1983, the K.G.B. planted an anonymous letter in an Indian newspaper alleging that the United States manufactured the virus that causes AIDS in an experiment at Fort Detrick, Md., according to documents at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars' Digital Archive.
The false claim spread extensively in the years that followed, even appearing at one point on "CBS Evening News With Dan Rather." The campaign ended only in 1987 when the Reagan administration warned the last Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who died on Tuesday, that it would hurt newly warming relations with the West.
Russia's propaganda model today has been adapted to take advantage of "technology and available media in ways that would have been inconceivable during the Cold War," according to the RAND study.
Despite "a shameless willingness to disseminate partial truths or outright fictions" and a disregard of consistency, the strategy can often be persuasive to some, especially those who have preconceived biases, one of the authors, Christopher Paul, said in an interview.
"There are still people who believe the C.I.A. caused AIDS in Africa, even though that idea has been thoroughly debunked," Mr. Paul said. "Not many, but some."
Like many disinformation campaigns, Russia's accusations on occasion have a passing relationship to facts.
Even before the war in Ukraine, Russia raised alarms about U.S. efforts to establish closer defense and research ties with several of Russia's neighbors, including other former republics of the Soviet Union.
The United States has poured millions of dollars of assistance into those countries, under the Biological Threat Reduction Program. The initiative was originally intended to dismantle the remnants of Soviet-era nuclear, chemical and biological weapons after the Cold War, including in Ukraine. It has expanded to focus on supporting biological research laboratories that are crucial to monitor and prevent diseases from spreading.
Russia previously made unsubstantiated claims about an American-financed lab in the former Soviet republic of Georgia, which Russia invaded in 2008.
The State Department, in a response to questions, said Russia's accusations were intended to justify and distract from its unprovoked invasion of Ukraine.
Since the war began, Russia has already raised its accusations before the United Nations Security Council. Izumi Nakamitsu, the U.N. under secretary general and high representative for disarmament affairs, twice told the Council that there was no evidence of any biological weapons programs in Ukraine.
Although Russian officials repeatedly promised to provide proof of the secret weapons research in Ukraine, they have not yet done so.
On Monday, Russia will make a presentation before representatives of the 184 nations that have signed the Biological Weapons Convention. The United States, Ukraine and other countries will be able to respond later in the week. Because the treaty has no verification or enforcement provisions, there will be no official ruling on Russia's claims, but on Friday nations can state their positions.
Dr. Lentzos of King's College London said that because of the format and geopolitics many countries might be unwilling to publicly contradict Russia or its biggest backer, China.
The only other time a member nation of the Biological Weapons Convention invoked a special session was in 1997, when Cuba accused the United States of spraying a plume of insects over the country's crops, causing a devastating infestation.
The proceedings were not public, but several nations later submitted written observations about Cuba's claims and the United States' rebuttal. Only North Korea supported Cuba's claim. Eight countries Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Japan, the Netherlands and New Zealand concluded there was no link. China and Vietnam said it was impossible to determine. (Russian submitted no response.)
"There's a big silent majority that just wants to sit on the fence," Dr. Lentzos said. "They don't really want to take a side because it could hurt their interests either way. And so the big question is not 'Do these guys believe it, or not?' It's to what extent are they motivated to act on it and speak out."
PARIS Mikhail S. Gorbachev believed the Soviet Union could be preserved without recourse to violence. This proved to be a misunderstanding of the nature of the repressive empire he ruled. The Soviet imperium collapsed in 1991, its ending embraced by the West as a victory for freedom and liberal democracy.
"Every Soviet leader before him knew you had to send in the tanks from time to time," said Carl Bildt, a former prime minister of Sweden. "In a way, Gorbachev's greatness lay in the fact that he was wrong."
If Poland held its first free elections since 1945 in the summer of 1989, if Czechoslovakia had a "velvet" and not a violent revolution later that year, if the Berlin Wall fell bloodlessly on Nov. 9, 1989, and if half a million Soviet troops traipsed home from Eastern Europe without firing a shot, it is because Mr. Gorbachev turned his back on the use of force.
"It is evident, for example, that force and the threat of force can no longer be, and should not be, instruments of foreign policy," Mr. Gorbachev told the United Nations on Dec. 7, 1988 a message that never reached the in tray of Russia's current president, Vladimir V. Putin.
Europe became whole thanks to Mr. Gorbachev. It is less clear what the West gave in return.
The open question, as the continent is again torn by war, is whether the United States and its allies, giddy with the possibilities opened up by Mr. Gorbachev's liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika, simply gobbled up his gift without serious reflection on its implications for Western security and societies.
President Bill Clinton suggested in 1997 that great-power territorial politics were over. A new era had dawned, he said, in which "enlightened self-interest, as well as shared values, will compel countries to define their greatness in more constructive ways."
A quarter-century later, Mr. Putin defines greatness through force in the pursuit of restored empire. But Mr. Clinton's was not an isolated Panglossian view in the West in the decade after Mr. Gorbachev's actions led to the end of the Cold War and the end of the Soviet Union.
There was a feeling that history would naturally flow the West's way because the chief ideological alternative in Moscow had crumbled. There was, it seemed, no alternative to the march of liberalism. Some imagined a "Third Way," combining the best of capitalism and socialism. It went nowhere.
This was an idealistic, and ultimately dangerous, mind-set because it tended to give the failings of Western societies a pass. Still, it was no more idealistic than Mr. Gorbachev's belief in a reformed communist society that was more open to individual initiative, more democratic, and ultimately more free.
In many ways, as Michel Duclos, a special adviser to the Institut Montaigne think-tank in Paris said, "Gorbachev was a Soviet Dubcek" a reference to Alexander Dubcek, the Czechoslovak leader whose attempt to bring "socialism with a human face" to his country in 1968 led Soviet tanks to rumble into Prague.
In the same 1988 speech to the United Nations, Mr. Gorbachev also said something long unthinkable in a Soviet leader: "We are, of course, far from claiming to have infallible truth."
Not only did Mr. Gorbachev, with a few exceptions, renounce violence, he renounced the infallibility of communist doctrine, the belief that the Soviet state had a monopoly on truth and could create a workers' paradise, by the gun and the gulag if necessary.
"This was Mr. Gorbachev's double renunciation, and of course what Putin is doing today is precisely the contrary," said Jacques Rupnik, a French political scientist focused on central Europe. "Gorbachev detonated something he could not control. He made history but he did not know what history he was making."
The history Mr. Gorbachev dreamed of was set out in part in an address to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in 1989. He spoke of a "common European home" and a "restructuring of the international order existing in Europe that would put European common values in the forefront and make it possible to replace the traditional balance of forces with a balance of interests."
It was necessary, he said, that "the idea of European unification should be collectively thought over once again."
This is the great chimera that has hung over Europe for more than three decades now. If the Cold War had ended, if the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact had been disbanded, could some new architecture be imagined in which Russia was not a rival, let alone an enemy?
Even in 2019, when he invited Mr. Putin to France to discuss a reordering of a Europe with a NATO that had suffered a "brain death," Emmanuel Macron, the French president, said: "Russia is European, very profoundly, and we believe in the Europe that stretches from Lisbon to Vladivostok."
The war in Ukraine has changed Mr. Macron's thinking. Of late, he has been forceful in denouncing Russian imperialism and violence. Between Lisbon and Vladivostok, there lies European soil bloodied yet again.
While it is tantalizing to reflect on the "common European home" imagined by Mr. Gorbachev, the fact is Russia after Mr. Gorbachev has not wanted to become a normal nation state that does not pose a threat to its neighbors.
"It has wanted an imperialist czar," said Mr. Duclos.
Mr. Putin, who once said "the borders of Russia do not end," appears to have been proved right in his conviction that an imagined "Russkiy mir," or Russian world, stretching far and wide over countries including Ukraine, is an idea that lies deep in the national psyche.
"What Russians cannot accept about Gorbachev is that he gave away the empire for nothing," said Mr. Rupnik.
But the attempt to restore it has been costly. If Poland and Hungary sought NATO's protection by joining the alliance, it was for a reason. Just as Russia has forged a passionate Ukrainian nationhood through its invasion, so it has redoubled the relevance of NATO, the very organization it believes should have disappeared with the Soviet Union.
So it is that as 100 million central Europeans are free thanks to Mr. Gorbachev, the united European continent at peace he imagined seems more distant than ever at the moment of his death. History does not move in straight lines.
For China, which crushed protest at Tiananmen Square just as Central Europe was breaking free of its Soviet shackles in 1989, the lesson was clear. Mr. Gorbachev was weak; the only way to modernize was through authoritarian reform backed by force.
But the West's debt to Mr. Gorbachev for bringing down a totalitarian empire is enormous. "He was a man of peace, although bitter at the end of his life, who willed the end to the Cold War and reduced the risk of nuclear confrontation," said Sylvie Bermann, a former French ambassador to Moscow.
When President John F. Kennedy confronted the imminent Soviet threat to a free Berlin in 1961, he said: "We cannot negotiate with people who say what's mine is mine and what's yours is negotiable."
That was Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev's line. Mr. Gorbachev favored negotiation over tanks, changing the world and losing his country.